■ 


^  PRINCETON,     N.    J- 


Shelf.;. 


BL    1010    .S3    V.21 

Tripi   taka. 

The   Saddharma-pundar   ika 


S''\ 


HI 

1.  ''!■''.■: 

":ft^>-'' 


',  v  ^  ^       f  ^ 


tiw  ■'  '■''■•'■-•'.       •'V 
•^*. '■>'-'  '. '    ••   •  ',■•■ 


.J5' 


THE 


SACRED   BOOKS  OF  THE  EAST 


[21] 


Honbon 


HENRY     FROWDE 


OXPOBD     UNIVERSITY     PRESS     WAREHOUSE 


AMEN   CORNER 


THE 


"sacred  books  of  the  east 


TRANSLATED 


BY  VARIOUS  ORIENTAL  SCHOLARS 


AND    EDITED    BY 


F.   MAX    MULLER 


VOL.    XXI 


AT      THE     CLARENDON      PRESS 
1884 

[A /I  rights  reserved^ 


THE 


SADDHARMA-PUiVMRlKA 


'  OR 


THE    LOTUS    OF    THE    TRUE    LAW 


TRANSLATED    BY 

y 

H.     KERN 


AT     THE     CLARENDON     PRESS 
1884 

\^All  rights  reserved"] 


\- 


\'\       rr  ♦.-■>■  ^-1  ("^  ^    •'^  .O  T  r*  "-T'  T, 
-V .,     JL  ii  aLi  U  .U  \J  vjr  A  O  ^A.  XJ 


'•^. 


'■n-r...... 


CONTENTS. 


.  <^-^ 


Introduction    . 
Chapter  1.     Introductory 


2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 

9. 


10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 

15. 
16. 
17. 

18. 
19. 
20. 

21. 
22. 


Skilfulness    . 

A  Parable     . 

Disposition    . 

On  Plants 

Announcement  of  Future  Destiny 

Ancient  Devotion 

Announcement  of  the  Future  Destiny  of  the 

Five  Hundred  Monks      .... 
Announcement    of   the    Future    Destiny    of 

Ananda,  Rahula,  and  the  Two  Thousand 

Monks    . 
The  Preacher 
Apparition  of  a  Stupa 
Exertion 
Peaceful  Life 
Issuing  of  Bodhisattvas  from  the  Gaps  of  the 

Earth      .... 
Duration  of  Life  of  the  Tathagata 
Of  Piety        .... 
Indication    of  the   Meritoriousness  of  Joyful 

Acceptance  ..... 
The  Advantages  of  a  Religious  Preacher 
Sadaparibhuta  ..... 
Conception  of  the  Transcendent  Power  of  the 

Tathagatas      .... 
Spells  ..... 

Ancient  Devotion  of  Bhaisha^yara^-a 


PACK 

ix 


3° 
6o 

98 

118 

142 

15.3 
191 


205 

21.3 

227 

255 
262 

281 
298 

311 

^28 

336 

3.'4 

363 

.370 
376 


VIU 

CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

Chapter 

23. 

Gadgadasvara 

393 

>> 

24. 

The  All-sided  One       .... 

406 

3J 

25. 

Ancient  Devotion        .... 

419 

>i 

26. 

Encouragement  of  Samantabhadra 

431 

}) 

27. 

The  Period 

440 

Index 

• 

443 

Transliteration  of  Oriental  Alphabets  adopted  for  the  Trans- 
lations of  the  Sacred  Books  of  the  East 


451 


INTRODUCTION. 


The  Saddharma-pu«</arika  is  one  of  the  nine  Dharmas 
which  are  known  by  the  titles  of — i.  Ash/asahasrika  Pra- 
^;7aparamita  ;  2.  Ga;/<^a-vyuha  ;  3.  Daxabhiimii-vara  ;  4.  Sa~ 
madhi-ra^a  ;  5-  Laiikavatara  ;  6.  Saddharma-pu/z</arika  ; 
7.  Tathagata-guhyaka  ;  8.  Lalita-vistara  ;  9.  Suvar//a-pra- 
bhasa. 

These  nine  works,  to  which  divine  worship  is  offered, 
embrace  (to  use  the  words  of  the  first  investigator  of 
Nepalese  Buddhism  ^)  '  in  the  first,  an  abstract  of  the 
philosophy  of  Buddhism^;  in  the  seventh,  a  treatise  on 
the  esoteric  doctrines ;  and  in  the  seven  remaining  ones, 
a  full  illustration  of  every  point  of  the  ordinary  doctrine 
and  discipline,  taught  in  the  easy  and  effective  way  of 
example  and  anecdote,  interspersed  with  occasional  in- 
stances of  dogmatic  instruction.  With  the  exception  of 
the  first,  these  works  are  therefore  of  a  narrative  kind ;  but 
interwoven  with  much  occasional  speculative  matter.' 

As  to  the  form,  it  would  seem  that  all  the  Dharmas  may 
rank  as  narrative  works,  which,  however,  does  not  exclude  in 
some  of  them  a  total  difference  in  style  of  composition  and 
character.  The  Lalita-vistara  e.g.  has  the  movement  of  a  real 
epic,  the  Saddharma-pu;/^arika  has  not.  The  latter  bears 
the  character  of  a  dramatic  performance,  an  undeveloped 
mystery  play,  in  which  the  chief  interlocutor^  not  the  only 

'  B.  H.  Hodgson,  Essays  on  the  Language,  Literature,  and  Religion  of  Nepal 
and  Tibet,  p.  13  ;  of.  p.  49. 

^  As  the  Perfect  Prao-;7a  is  she  who  has  produced  all  Tathagatas,  the  mother 
of  all  Bodhisattvas,  Pratyekabuddhas,  and  Disciples  (see  Cowell  and  Eggeling, 
Catalogue  of  Buddhist  Sanskrit  Manuscripts,  Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic 
Society,  New  Series,  VIIL  p.  3),  we  must  infer  that  the  work  is  chiefly  intended 
to  set  forth  the  principia  rerum.  It  begins  with  chaos  (pradhana  or  pra^jla)  ; 
and  hence  its  place  at  the  commencement  of  the  list.  We  may,  perhaps,  best 
designate  it  as  an  abstract  of  mystic-natural  or  materialistic  philosophy. 


X  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA. 


one,  is  6"akyamuni,  the  Lord.  It  consists  of  a  series  of 
dialogues,  brightened  by  the  magic  effects  of  a  would-be 
supernatural  scenery.  The  phantasmagorical  parts  of  the 
whole  are  as  clearly  intended  to  impress  us  with  the  idea 
of  the  might  and  glory  of  the  Buddha,  as  his  speeches  are 
to  set  forth  his  all-surpassing  wisdom.  Some  affinity  of  its 
technical  arrangement  with  that  of  the  regular  Indian  drama 
is  visible  in  the  prologue  or  Nidana,  where  Ma/T^um  at  the 
end  prepares  the  spectators  and  auditors — both  are  the 
same — for  the  beginning  of  the  grand  drama,  by  telling 
them  that  the  Lord  is  about  to  awake  from  his  mystic 
slumber  and  to  display  his  infinite  wisdom  and  power. 

In  the  book  itself  we  find  it  termed  a  Siltra  or  SAtranta 
of  the  class  called  Mahavaipulya.  In  a  highly  instructive 
discussion  on  the  peculiar  characteristics  and  comparative 
age  of  the  different  kinds  of  Sutras,  Burnouf  arrives  at  the 
conclusion  that  the  Mahavaipulya  Sutras  are  posterior  to 
the  simple  Sutras  in  general^.  As  there  are  two  categories 
of  simple  Sutras,  i.  those  in  which  the  events  narrated  are 
placed  contemporary  with  the  Buddha,  2.  those  which 
refer  to  persons  living  a  considerable  time  after  his  reputed 
period,  e.  g.  Ai-oka  ^,  it  follows  that  the  composition  of  the 
Mahavaipulya  Sutras  must  be  held  to  fall  in  a  later  time 
than  the  production  of  even  the  second  category  of  simple 
Slatras.  Now  in  one  of  the  latter,  the  Aj-oka-Avadana,  we 
read  of  Ajoka  using  the  word  dinara^  which  leads  us  to 
the  conclusion  that  the  said  Avadana  was  composed,  not 
only  after  the  introduction  of  dinar  a  from  the  West,  in 
the  first  century  of  our  era  or  later,  but  at  a  still  more 
modern  time,  when  people  had  forgotten  the  foreign  origin 
of  the  coin  in  question. 

The  results  arrived  at  by  Burnouf  may  be  right  so  far  as 
any  Mahavaipulya  Sutra,  as  a  whole,  is  concerned ;  they 
cannot  be  applied  to  all  the  component  parts  of  such  a 
work.     Not  to  go  further  than  the  Saddharma-pu«</arika 

'  Introduction  h,  I'histoire  du  Buddhisme  indien,  pp.  103-12S. 
^  Burnouf,  Introd.  p.  218  seq. 

^  Burnouf,  Introd.  p.  423;  cf.  p.  431,  where  Pushyamitra  is  made  to  speak 
of  Dinaras  :  Max  Mixller,  History  of  Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature,  p   245. 


INTRODUCTION.  XI 


and  the  Lalita-vistara,  it  can  hardly  be  questioned  that 
these  works  contain  parts  of  very  different  dates,  and  derived 
from  various  sources.  The  material  discrepancies  between 
the  version  in  prose  and  that  in  verse  are  occasionally  too 
great  to  allow  us  to  suppose  them  to  have  been  made 
simultaneously  or  even  by  different  authors  conjointly  at 
work^  Further  it  can  be  shown  that  the  Mahavaipulya 
Sutras  are  partially  made  up  of  such  materials  as  must  be 
referred  to  the  oldest  period  of  Buddhism.  Let  me  adduce 
some  examples  to  render  more  clear  what  I  mean. 

If  we  compare  Lalita-vistara  (Calc.  ed.),  p.  513,  13-p.  514, 
2,  with  Mahavagga  (ed.  Dr.  Oldenberg)  I,  5,  2,  we  perceive 
that  the  passages  are  to  a  great  extent  literally  identical, 
and  that  the  variations  amount  to  little  more  than  a 
varietas  lectionis. 

The  passage  adduced  is  in  prose ;  now  let  us  take  some 
stanzas.  In  Mahavagga  I,  5,  3,  the  Lord  utters  the  follov/- 
ing  j-lokas : 

kiM//ena  me  adhigata//^  halaw  dani  pakasitum, 
ragadosaparetehi  naya?;/  dhammo  susambudho. 
pa/isotagami  nipu/za///  gambhira/w  duddasaw  a/^um 
ragaratta  na  dakkhanti  tamokhandhena  avuta. 

This  does  not  materially  differ  from  Lalita-vistara,  p.  515, 
16  seq. : 

pratisrotagamiko  margo  gambhiro  durdr/jo  mama, 
na  taw  drakshya(n)ti  ^  ragandha  ala;;^  tasmat  prakaj-itum. 
anusrota;/^  pravahyante  kameshu  patita//  pra^a/2 ; 
Vrikkhx^u's,  me 'yaw  sampraptam(!)  alam  tasmat  praka^itum. 

Though  there  is  some  difference  in  the  wording  and 
arrangement  of  the  verses,  it  is  of  such  a  kind  as  to  exclude 
all  idea  of  the  compiler  of  the  Lalita-vistara  having 
composed  the  distichs  himself.  Even  the  words  ay  aw 
dhammo  susambudho  and  nipuwaw  of  the  Pali  text 
were  known  to  him,  as  appears  from  the  passage  in  prose 
immediately   preceding   the   jlokas    quoted:  gambhira/^ 


^  See  e.g.  the  foot-note,  p.  413. 


2 


An  erroneous  Sanskritisation  of  the  present  tense  dakkhanti 


xii  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARiKA. 

khalv  ayaw,  Mahabrahman,  maya  dharmo  'bhisam- 

buddha/^  jukshmo  nipuwa//.    What  follows,  api  kd.  me, 

Brahman,  ime  gathe  abhikshwaw  pratibhasata/^^, 

is  but  a  slight,  not  very  felicitous  modification  of  what  we 

read  in  the  Mahavagga  1.  c. :  api  ''ssu  bhagavanta;«  ima 

anay^/('/^ariya  gathayo  paz'ibhawsu  pubbe  assuta- 

pubba. 

Evidently  from  the  same  source  are  the  verses  in  Trish- 

2fubh  uttered  by  the  god  Brahma,  Mahavagga  I,  5,  7,  and 

those  found  in  Lalita-vistara,  p.  517,  3  seq.   The  former  text 

has : 

paturahosi  Magadhesu  pubbe 

dhammo  asuddho  samalehi  /^intito, 

apapur'  etaw  amatassa  dvara;;^ 

su;/antu  dhammaw  vimalenanubuddham  ^. 

The  other  runs  thus  : 

vado  babhuva  samalair  vi/^intito 
dharmo  hy  ^  a^-uddho  Magadheshu  purvam  ; 
amrztaw  mune  tad  vivrzVashva  dvaraw 
j-rmvanti  ^  dharma  vipula;/^  ^  vimalena  buddham. 
On  comparing  the  two  texts  we  may  infer  that  the  Pali 
version  is  purer,  that  vado   babhuva  is  a  corruption  of 
padu   babhuva   or   something   like    it,    answering   to   a 
Sanskrit  pradur  babhuva,  but  we  cannot  deny  that  the 
stanzas  have  the  same  origin. 

In    Mahavagga  I,  5,    12,  the  Lord   addresses  the    god 
Brahma  with  the  following  Trish/ubh : 
aparuta  tesam  amatassa  dvara 
ye  sotavanto,  pamuH/^antu  ^  saddham. 

1  Obviously  an  unhappy  attempt  to  Sanskritise  a  Pali  or  Prakrit  pati- 
bhamsu;  it  ought  to  have  been  pratyabhasish/am. 

'■^  The  text  is  corrupt;  vk^e  have  either  to  read  vimalanubuddhaw,  a 
Tatpurusha  compound  expressing  the  same  as  what  the  text  exhibits,  or  vima- 
lena buddhawz. 

^  Hi  is  meaningless,  and  only  a  clumsy  device  to  satisfy  the  exigency  of 
Sanskrit  phonelical  rules,  which  are  not  applicable  to  Prakrit. 

*  Read  jr/nvantu. 

^  Read  dharmaw  vimalena.  Vipula  probably  owes  its  origin  to  a 
dittography. 

«  I  do  not  understand  this  pamuil^antu,  i.  e.  let  them  cast  off,  loose  or  emit. 
Perhaps  we  have  to  read  payuwg'antu,  let  them  practise. 


INTRODUCTION.  Xlll 


vihi;;zsasa;7/1i  pagu;^aw  na  bhasi 
dhammaw  pawitaw  manu^esu,  Brahma ;  iti. 

Then  in  prose :  Atha  kho  Brahma  Sahampati  katavakaso 

kho  'mhi    bhagavata   dhammadesanaya  'ti    bhagavantam 

abhivadetva  padakkhiwaw  katva  tatth^  ev'  antaradhayi. 

The  parallel    passage  in  Lalita-vistara,  p,  520,  19  seq., 

has: 

apavr/tas  tesham  ^  amn'tasya  dvara 

Brahmann  iti  '^  satataw  ye  jrotavanta/^, 

pravi^anti  j-raddha  na  vihe//^asa;^^«a 

srinvanti  dharma;//  Magadheshu  sattva/^. 

Atha  khalu  6'ikhi  Mahabrahma  Tathagatasyadhivasana;/^ 
viditva  tush/a  udagra  attamana  pramudita//  pritisauma- 
nasya^atas  Tathagatasya  padau  ^irasabhivanditva  tatrai- 
vantaradhat. 

At  the  meeting  of  the  A^ivaka  monk  Upaka  and  the 
Buddha,  the  latter  is  represented  as  having  pronounced  the 
following  i-lokas  (Mahavagga  I,  6,  8  and  9) : 

na  me  akarlyo  atthi,  sadiso  me  na  vi^^ati, 
sadevakasmiw  lokasmiw  n'  atthi  me  pa^'ipuggalo, 
aha.m  hi  araha  loke,  aha/w  sattha  anuttaro, 
eko  'mhi  sammasambuddho,  sitibhuto  'smi  nibbuto. 
madisa  ve  G^ina  honti  ye  patta  asavakkhayaw, 
^ita  me  papaka  dhamma  tasmaham  Upaka  ^  ^ino. 

Materially  the  same  i^lokas,  albeit  in  somewhat  different 
arrangement,  occur  Lalita-vistara,  p.  526,  22  seq.,  as  being 
spoken  at  the  same  meeting : 

a^aryo  nahi  me  kajZ'it,  sadnVo  me  na  vidyate, 
eko  'ham  asmi  sambuddha/^,  j-itibhuto  nirasrava/^ 
aham  evaha;«*  loke  i-asta  hy  aham  anuttara//, 
sadevasuragandharve  nasti  me  pratipudgala/^  ^. 

*  Read  tesham,  if  not  tesam,  because  a  contraction  of  am  and  a  following 
vowel  into  one  syllable  is  as  common  as  one  of  am  is  unheard  of. 

^  These  words  do  not  suit  the  metre,  and  have  undoubtedly  been  transposed 
from  their  original  place,  which  they  have  kept  in  the  Pali  text. 

^  Rather  Upaka,  a  common  Prakrit  form  of  the  vocative  case.  See  Sukha- 
vati-vyuha,  p.  xi,  in  Anecdota  Oxoniensia,  Aryan  Series,  vol.  i,  part  ii. 

*  Read  aham  evaraham  (Sanskrit  arhan). 

^  The  Calc.  ed.  has  wrongly  "^dharvo  and  "puiigala^. 


XIV  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA. 

Gina  hi  madrwa  gneydi  ye  prapta  asravakshaya;;/, 
g'ltdi  me  papaka  dharmas  tenopa(ka)  6^ino  [hy]  aham. 

The  following  verses,  taken  from  Mahavagga  and  Lalita- 
vistara  1.  c,  have  likewise  the  same  origin,  notwithstanding 
some  variations : 

dhammaZ'akkaw  pavattetuw  ga/?'/^//ami  Kasinaw  pura»?, 
andhabhutasmi  lokasmi;;^  aha/Thi  amatadudrabhi;«. 

Compare: 
Vara;^asi;«  gamishyami  gatva  vai  Kai'ika;;/  purim, 
andhabhutasya  lokasya  kartasmy  asadr/si;«  -^  prabham. 
Vara//asi;;2  gamishyami  gatva  vai  Ka.i'ikaw  purim, 
jabdahinasya  lokasya  ta^/ayishye  ^  'mr/tadundubhim. 
Vara;^asi;«  gamishyami  gatva  vai  Ka^ika?«  purim, 
dharma^akraw  pravartishye  lokeshv  aprativartitam. 

An  important  passage  on  the  divine  sight  of  the  Buddha 
in  Lalita-vistara,  p.  439  seq.,  almost  literally  occurs  in  the 
SamaJwTaphala-Sutta,  as  has  been  pointed  out  by  Burnouf  ^. 

These  few  examples  I  have  chosen  will  suffice  to  prove 
that  the  material  of  a  Mahavaipulya  Sutra  is  partly  as  old 
as  that  of  any  other  sacred  book  of  the  Buddhists.  The 
language  of  the  prose  part  of  those  Sutras  does  not  differ 
from  that  used  in  the  simple  Sutras  of  the  Northern  canon. 
Should  the  Sanskrit  text  prove  to  be  younger  than  the 
Pali  text,  then  we  may  say  that  we  do  not  possess  the 
Northern  tradition  in  its  original  shape.  That  result, 
however,  affords  no  criterion  for  the  distinction  between 
the  simple  Sutras  and  the  Mahavaipulya  S6tras,  for  both  are 
written  in  the  very  same  Sanskrit,  if  we  except  the  Gathas. 

It  would  lead  me  too  far,  were  I  to  enter  into  the  heart 
of  the  question  which  of  the  three  idioms^  Sanskrit,  Pali, 
and  the  so-called  Gatha  dialect,  was  the  oldest  scriptural 
language  of  the  Buddhists,  and  I  will  therefore  confine 
myself  to  a  few  remarks.    In  the  first  place  it  will  be  granted 

^  The  reading  ahaw  sadr/siw2  of  the  Calc.  ed.  is  clearly  a  corrupt  reading. 

^  This  word,  which  spoils  the  metre,  has  manifestly  replaced  an  older 
expression,  not  unlikely  ahaiihi,  or  a  similar  form  of  the  future  tense  of  ahan 
(Sansk.  ahanishye). 

^  Lotus  de  la  bonne  Loi,  p.  864. 


INTRODUCTION.  XV 


that  the  same  person  cannot  have  uttered  any  speech  or 
stanza  in  two  languages  at  the  same  time,  and,  further,  that 
he  is  not  hkely  to  have  spoken  Sanskrit,  when  expressing  him- 
self in  prose,  and  to  have  had  recourse  to  a  mere  dialect,  when 
speaking  in  poetry.  One  need  not  suppose  that  the  common 
and  every-day  language  of  the  god  Brahma  and  the  Buddha 
was  Pali  or  Prakrit,  in  order  to  call  it  an  absurdity  that  those 
persons  would  have  spoken  prose  in  Sanskrit  and  poetry  in 
the  Gatha  dialect,  such  as  we  find  in  some  passages  already 
quoted  and  in  many  others.  Nor  is  it  absurd,  even  if  we  do 
not  believe  that  Pali  is  the  original  language  of  scripture, 
to  contend  that  the  Sanskrit  text  of  the  canonical  works  is 
at  any  rate  a  translation  from  some  dialect.  If  the  Sanskrit 
text  of  the  Northern  Sutras,  in  general,  were  the  original  one, 
it  would  be  impossible  to  account  for  occasional  mistrans- 
lations and  for  the  fact  that  the  most  palpable  dialect  forms 
have  been  left  untouched,  whenever  the  passage  by  being 
Sanskritised  would  have  been  spoilt.  A  striking  instance  is 
afforded  in  Lalita-vistara,  p.  145.  There  we  read  that  the  pro- 
nouncing of  the  letter  tJfA.  of  the  Indian  alphabet  is  to  be 
brought  in  connection  with  the  word  //^apaniyaprai^na,  i.e. 
a  question  that  should  be  avoided,  set  aside,  Pali  ///apani- 
yapa>7ho.  Here  the  context  absolutely  opposed  itself  to  the 
Pali  or  Prakrit  //^apaniya  being  rendered  by  the  Sanskrit 
sthapaniya,  because  the  initial  syllable  of  this  form  could 
not  be  made  to  agree  with  the  letter  ///a.  On  the  same 
page  of  the  Lalista-vistara  we  also  meet  with  a  word 
airapatha^,  the  initial  syllable  of  which  must  needs  har- 
monise with  the  diphthong  ai,  so  that  airapatha  did  not 
admit  of  being  Sanskritised  into  aryapatha.  From  the 
occurrence  of  this  airapatha  I  infer  that  the  original  text 
was  composed  in  some  kind  of  Prakrit,  and  not  in  regular 
Pali,  because  the  latter  has  lost  both  the  primary  and 
secondary  diphthong  ai,  though  it  may  be  asked  whether 
forms   such   as    kayira   (Sansk.    karya),    payirupasati 

^  Written  airapatha,  for  the  Vnddhi  vowel  denotes  the  sound  of  ai  in 
Sanskrit,  at  least  originally ;  from  the  same  diphthong  being  used  in  the  Asoka 
edicts  in  thaira  (Sansk.  sthavira),  we  must  infer  thai  the  diphthong  was,  in 
the  then  Prakrit,  sounded  ai,  not  ai. 


xvi  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA. 


(Sansk.  paryupdsati),  and  the  like  are  anything  else  but 
instances  of  inaccurate  spelling^.  This  much  is  certain  that 
thai r a  occurs  in  the  inscriptions  of  A^-oka,  and  in  these 
the  diphthong  cannot  but  have  the  value  of  a  short  a  fol- 
lowed by  i. 

If  we  eliminate  the  Sanskrit,  there  remain  two  dialects, 
Pali  and  the  Gatha  idiom.  Which  of  the  two  can  lay  claim 
to  being  the  original  language  of  the  Buddhist  scriptures  or 
is  the  nearest  approach  to  it?  Pali  is  intelligible  in  its 
phonetics,  the  Gathas  are  not.  Under  ordinary  circum- 
stances the  comparatively  greater  regularity  of  Pali  would 
tend  to  favour  its  claims ;  the  case  before  us  is,  however,  so 
peculiar  that  it  is  not  safe  to  draw  inferences  from  the  state 
in  which  the  Gathas  have  come  to  us.  It  seems  to  me  that 
the  verses  in  the  Northern  books  in  general,  as  well  as  the 
prose  of  the  Mahavastu  ^,  have  been  Sanskritised  to  a  large 
extent,  so  that  they  ought  to  be  restored,  as  much  as 
possible,  to  a  more  primitive  form,  before  a  comparison  with 
Pali  can  lead  to  satisfactory  results.  When  we  come  across 
such  words  as  heshif/zad  (Sansk.  adhastad),  gu;?ebhi/^, 
&c.,  we  easily  perceive  that  these  forms  are  more  primitive 
than  Pali  he//// a,  gunehi;  but  what  warrant  have  we  of  such 
forms  being  really  in  use  at  the  time  when  the  Gathas  were 
composed,  if  we  observe  that  in  a  verse,  Lalita-vistara  ^^, 
the  syllable  hhi/i  is  reckoned  as  a  short  one  in  the  words 
gnnehhl/i  prat i pur;/ a?  In  short,  in  their  present  state 
the  Gathas  afford  no  conclusive  evidence  that  the  language  in 
which  they  were  composed  is  older  than  Pali. 

Whatever  may  have  been  the  phonetic  aspect  of  the 
oldest  standard  dialect  of  the  Buddhists,  its  vocabulary  is 
unmistakably  closely  related  to  that  of  the  vSatapatha- 
brahmawa.      The    coincidences   are    so    striking   that    the 


'  That  is,  kayira  was  probably  pronounced  kaira,  which  cannot  be 
exactly  expressed  by  g;;^,  because  those  who  were  acquainted  with  the  rules 
of  Sanskrit  grammar  would  pronounce  this  and  similar  words  with  the  sound 
of  ai. 

^  The  able  editor  of  this  work,  M.  Senart,  makes  the  following  remarks  on 
its  language  (p.  xii) :  'Nous  sommes  ici  en  presence  d'une  langue  irreguliere 
et  instable,  melange  singulier  de  formes  diverses  d'age  et  d'origine.' 


INTRODUCTION.  XVll 


interval  separating  the  younger  parts  of  the  ^atapatha  and 
the  beginnings  of  Buddhist  literature  can  hardly  be  sup- 
posed to  have  been  very  great.  Among  those  coincidences 
I  cite  sarvavat,  a  word  which  as  yet  has  not  been  dis- 
covered in  the  whole  range  of  Sanskrit  literature  except 
5atap.  XIV,  7,  i,  lo,  and  in  Northern  Buddhist  writings,  as 
well  as  in  Pali  (sabbava).  The  aira^  \€y6ixevoi>  ekoti 
6"atap.  XII,  2,  2,  4  recurs  in  ekoti-bhava,  Lalita-vistara, 
p.  147,  8^;  p.  439,  6;  Pali  ekodi-bhava^.  The  expres- 
sion samirita  in  the  sense  of  'equipped,  furnished  with' 
occurs  in  ^atapatha  thrice  ^,  in  Atharva-veda  once,  in  Sad- 
dharma-pu;?(/arika  several  times,  e.g.  in  pa/Zaghaw/asa- 
mirita,  chap.  xxii.  We  may  add  the  Prakritism  iu^  in 
samiw^ayati,  BrzTiad-arawyaka  VI,  4,  23,  the  usual  form 
in  Buddhist  works  in  Sanskrit,  Gatha  dialect,  and  Pili ; 
further  manku,  5atap.  V,  5,  4,  11  ;  maw^a  in  the  com- 
pound naumauda,  vSatap.  II.  3,  3,  15;  cf.  bodhi-maw^a. 
An  archaic  trait  in  the  stanzas  is  the  expletive  use  of  the 
particle  u,  e.g.  in  teno,  yeno,  tasyo,  adyo,  for  tena, 
yena,  tasya,  adya.  Both  in  prose  and  poetry*  we  meet 
with  no,  sometimes  in  the  sense  of  Sansk.  no,  which  etymo- 
logically  of  course  is  identical  with  it,  at  other  times  in  that  of 
Sansk.  na.  An  analogous  case  is  Sansk.  atho,  almost  im- 
perceptibly differing  from  at  ha.  Perhaps  the  most  curious 
of  similar  forms  in  the  Gathas  is  ko,  in  meaning  exactly 
coinciding  with  ka ;  this  /^o  I  take  to  be  the  older  form  of 
the  Magadhi  /^u  in  the  Aj-oka  edicts. 

From  the  occurrence  of  peculiar  old  words  and  forms  we 
may  draw  inferences  as  to  the  age  of  certain  compositions 
in  ordinary  cases  ;  but  it  is  not  safe  to  apply  the  same  test,  if 
there  is  sufficient  reason  to  suppose  that  the  work,  the  date 


1  Ekabhibhava  of  the  Calc.  text  is  a  clerical  blunder. 

*  See  Childers'  Pali  Diet.  p.  134,  where  the  Thero  Subhuti's  etymology  eko 
u  d  e  t  i  proves  that  he  does  not  know  the  origin  of  the  word ;  nor  is  it  likely  that  the 
writer  of  the  Pali  passage  cited  by  Childers  knew  more,  for  had  he  recognised 
the  word,  he  would  have  written  ekoti,  because  a  Prakrit  d  between  two 
vowels,  if  answering  to  a  Sanskrit  t,  usually  requires  a  t  in  Pili. 

s  111,5,1,31;  VIII,  2,  6;  XIV.  I,  3,  31. 

*  Also  in  the  inscriptions  of  Asoka. 

[21]  b 


XViii  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARlKA. 


of  which  we  wish  to  determine,  has  been  carefully  moulded 
upon  time-honoured  models.  In  such  a  case  new  words 
prove  a  good  deaP,  old  ones  next  to  nothing.  Therefore  it 
would  be  an  abuse  of  the  argument  ex  silentioto  infer 
from  the  total  absence  of  such  new  words  in  our  Sad- 
dharma-puwrf'arika  that  the  bulk  of  the  Sutra  must  date 
from  the  earlier  period  of  Buddhism. 

I  had  already  occasion  to  notice  that  the  two  versions, 
the  prose  and  the  metrical  one,  in  our  Sutra  show  here 
and  there  material  discrepancies.  The  question  arises 
to  which  of  the  two  we  must  award  the  palm  of  pri- 
ority. Repeatedly,  both  in  prose  and  poetry,  the  Sutra 
is  spoken  of  as  consisting  of  stanzas  ;  e.g.  chap,  vii,  st.  82  ; 
chapters  x  and  xxii  in  the  prose  portion,  several  times. 
As  the  term  of  stanza  (gatha),  for  aught  I  know,  is  never 
used  to  denote  a  certain  number  of  syllables,  there  is  a 
strong  presumption  that  the  ancient  text  consisted  of 
verses,  with  an  admixture  of  short  prose  passages  serving 
as  introduction  or  to  connect  the  more  solemn  poetical 
pieces.  The  idea  to  expand  such  passages  into  a  regular 
prose  version  would  especially  recommend  itself  at  a  period 
when  the  poetical  dialect  began  to  become  obsolete  and 
obscure.  Without  being  a  formal  commentary,  the  prose 
version  would  yet  tend  to  elucidate  the  older  holy  text. 

It  will  not  be  objected  that,  because  not  all  chapters  in 
the  Saddharma-puwrf'arika  have  a  poetical  version  added, 
the  original  cannot  have  been  a  poem.  For  the  chapters 
containing  but  one  version,  viz.  xxi,  xxii,  xxiii,  xxv,  and 
xxvi,  show  decided  traces  of  being  later  additions  ;  and 
as  to  the  final  chapter,  it  may  be  held  to  be  a  moderate 
amplification  of  a  short  prose  epilogue. 

In  contending  that  the  original  text  of  our  Sutra  was  pro- 
bably, in  the  main,  a  work  in  metrical  form,  I  do  not  mean 
to  say  that  the  poetical  version  in  all  the  chapters  must  be 


*  As  e.g.  the  word  dinara  in  the  Asoka  Avadana  ;  the  passage  on  the  Greeks 
Yonas,  in  Assalayana  Sutta  (ed.  Pischel),  p.  lo ;  cf.  the  editor's  remark,  p.  6  ; 
the  word  karama  for  kalama,  calamus  to  write  with,  in  Kara«Ja-vyuha 
(Calc.  ed.),  p.  69. 


INTRODUCTION.  XIX 


considered  to  be  prior  to  the  prosed  The  Gathas  of  the  Sad- 
dharma-pu;/(^arika  are  nowhere  very  brilhant,  but  in  some 
chapters  they  are  so  excessively  clumsy  and  mechanically  put 
together  that  involuntarily  we  are  led  to  the  assumption  of 
their  having  been  made  by  persons  to  whom  the  old  dialect 
was  no  longer  familiar.  The  stanzas,  e.  g.  in  chapters  xi  and 
xiv,  are  abominable  in  form,  and  unusually  silly ;  those  in 
chap,  xxiv  are  a  pattern  of  mechanical  verse-making,  and 
give  the  impression  as  if  they  were  intended  rather  to  stul- 
tify than  to  edify  the  credulous  reader.  Now  it  is  a  curious 
fact  that  in  a  Chinese  preface  to  the  translation  of  our 
Sutra  by  6^^7anagupta  and  Dharmagupta,  A.D.  6oi^,  we 
meet  with  the  following  notice :  '  The  omission  of  the 
Gathas  in  No.  134,  chaps.  12  and  25^,  have  since  been  filled 
in  by  some  wise  men,  whose  example  I  wish  to  follow  *.' 

Here  we  have  a  direct  proof  that  the  Gathas  of  some 
chapters  have  been  added  in  later  times.  Had  we  similar 
notices  concerning  all  the  chapters  in  which  the  Gathas  are  of 
a  comparatively  modern  date,  and  could  we  prove  that  the 
prose  of  such  chapters  belongs  to  a  later  period,  then  the 
supposition  of  the  ancient  text  of  the  Saddharma-puwrt'arika 
having  been  in  the  main  a  metrical  one  would  seem  to  lose 
in  strength.  For,  reasoning  by  analogy,  one  might  say 
that  just  as  some  later  chapters  have  notoriously  been 
enriched  with  a  metrical  version  in  later  times,  so  the 
ancient  parts  also  will  have  gradually  received  their  Gathas. 
Still  the  fact  remains  that  those  chapters  in  which  the  me- 
trical portion  is  wanting  clearly  belong  to  a  later  period,  so 
that  it  is  questionable  whether  their  case  is  entirely  ana- 
logous to  that  of  the  more  ancient  part  of  the  whole  work. 


^  Isolated  stanzas,  as  in  chapters  xxii,  xxv,  and  elsewhere,  are  wholly  left 
out  of  question. 

^  Catalogue  of  the  Tripi^aka  (Oxford),  by  Mr.  Bunyiu  Nanjio;  Sutra  Pi/aka, 
col.  45. 

'  In  the  English  translation  chapters  xi  and  xxiv. 

*  Another  notice  in  the  above-mentioned  Catalogue,  col.  44,  runs  thus  :  '  The 

portion  of  prose '  (of  chap,  xxiv)  '  was  translated  by  Kumarag-iva,  of  the  latter 

Tshin  dynasty,  A.D.  384-417;   and  that   of  Gathas  by   G«anagupta,  of  the 

'Northern  A'eu  dynasty,  a.d.  557-589.'     So  it  seems  that  the  Gathas  have  been 

added,  and,  not  unlikely,  been  composed,  between  417  and  557  a.d. 

b  2 


XX  SADDHARMA-PUA^DARIKA. 


At  present  we  are  far  from  the  ultimate  end  which  critical 
research  has  to  reach ;  we  are  not  able  to  assign  to  each 
part  of  our  Sdtra  its  proper  place  in  the  development  of 
Buddhist  literature.  We  may  feel  that  compositions  from 
different  times  have  been  collected  into  a  not  very  har- 
monious whole ;  we  may  even  be  able  to  prove  that  some 
passages  are  as  decidedly  ancient  as  others  are  modern,  but 
any  attempt  to  analyse  the  compound  and  lay  bare  its 
component  parts  would  seem  to  be  premature.  Under 
these  circumstances  the  inquiry  after  the  date  of  the  work 
resolves  itself  into  the  question  at  what  time  the  book 
received  its  present  shape. 

There  exist,  as  it  is  well  known,  various  Chinese  trans- 
lations of  the  Saddharma-pu;/^arika,  or  parts  of  it,  the  dates 
of  which  are  well  ascertained.  The  above-mentioned  Cata- 
logue by  Mr.  Bunyiu  Nanjio  affords  some  valuable  informa- 
tion about  the  subject,  from  which  I  borrow  the  following 
particulars^ : 

The  oldest  Chinese  translation,  known  by  the  title  of 
TTan-fa-hwa-z^in,  is  from  Km  Fa-hu  (Dharmaraksha),  of  the 
Western  Tsin  dynasty,  A.D.  265-316;  in  38  chapters^. 

Equally  old  is  an  incomplete  translation  entitled  Sa-than- 
fan-tho-li-/^in,  of  an  unknown  author. 

Next  in  time  comes  the  Miao-fa-lien-hwa-/^ih,  by  Kuma- 
ra^iva,  of  the  latter  Tshin  dynasty,  A.D.  384-417  ^  It  agrees 
with  the  Tibetan  version,  and  contains  28  chapters.  Of  one 
chapter  (xxiv  in  the  Nepalese  MSS.  and  the  English 
translation)  Kumara^iva  translated  the  prose  only;  the 
Gathas  were  rendered  by  Qlanagupta,  of  the  Northern 
^eu  dynasty,  A.D.  557-589. 

The  last  translation  in  order  of  time,  entitled  Thien-phin- 
mido-fa-lien-hwa-/^ih,  is  from  G^;Tanagupta  and  Dharma- 
gupta,  A.D.  601,  of  the  Sui  dynasty;  in  27  chapters. 

We  see  that  the  older  translations— and,  consequently, 
their  originals— counted  one  chapter  more  than  our  MSS. 

^  Sutra  Pimka,  col.  44  seqq. 

2  In  S.  Beal,  The  Buddhist  Tripi/aka,  p.  14,  the  name  of  the  author  .K'u  Fa- 
hu  (Chu-fa-hu)  is  identified  with  Dharmagupta. 
a  Cf.  Beal,  Buddhist  Tripi/aka,  p.  15. 


INTRODUCTION. 


XXI 


The  difterence,  however,  does  not  affect  the  contents  of  the 
whole,  because  the  matter  divided  over  chapters  ii  and  12 
of  the  older  translations  is  contained  in  chap,  xi  of  our 
texts  and  the  latest  Chinese  version.  The  order  of  the 
chapters  is  the  same  in  all  the  texts,  both  original  and 
translated,  up  to  chap,  xx  (  =  31  older  division);  the  dis- 
crepancies first  begin  at  chap,  xxi,  on  Dhara;ns.  The 
subjoined  comparative  table,  to  begin  with  the  chapter  on 
Dhara;/is,  exhibits  the  order  of  the  last  seven  chapters  in 
the  various  texts.  The  first  column  refers  to  the  Nepalese 
MSS.  and  the  Chinese  translation  by  6^/Tanagupta  and 
Dharmagupta;  the  second  to  the  oldest  Chinese  transla- 
tion ;  the  third  to  that  of  Kumara^iva. 


I 

a 

3 

4 

5 
6 

7 

A  glance  at  th 


4 

I 

% 

3 
5 
6 

7 


5 

a 

3 
4 
6 

7 

I 


lis  table  will  sufiice  to  convince  us  that 
chapters  xxi-xxvi  (1-6)  are  of  later  growth,  if  we  bear 
in  mind  that  the  order  of  the  chapters  down  to  the  Dha- 
ra«is  is  the  same  in  all  sources.  This  result  is  quite  in 
harmony  with  what  we  would  have  guessed  upon  internal 
grounds.  The  last  chapter,  entitled  Dharmaparyaya,  must, 
from  its  very  nature,  have  been  the  close,  the  epilogue  of 
the  whole.  In  the  Chinese  translation  of  Kumara^iva  it 
occurs,  as  the  table  shows,  immediately  after  chap,  xx,  by 
itself  a  clear  indication  that  xxi-xxvi  are  later  additions. 
It  is  somewhat  strange  that  in  the  older  translation  of 
K\x  Fa-hu  the  Dharmaparyaya  has  already  taken  its  place 
after  the  additional  matter,  but  this  may  be  explained  on 
the  supposition  that  Kumara^iva,  though  living  in  a  later 
time,  made  use  of  ancient    manuscripts \     However  that 


'  The  preface  to  the  Chinese  translation  of  G/Tanagupta  and  Dharmagupta 
says  :  '  The  translations  of  K\x  Fa-hu  and  Kumara^iva  are  most  probably  made 
from  two  different  texts.' 


Xxii  SADDHARMA-PUiVZ)ARfKA. 

may  be,  I  think  that  the  following  facts  may  be  held  to 
be  established,  both  from  internal  and  external  evidence : 
I.  The  more  ancient  text  of  the  Saddharma-puwrtfarika 
contained  21  chapters  and  an  epilogue,  i.e.  the  matter  of 
chaps,  i-xx  and  of  chap,  xxvii ;  2.  The  later  additions, 
excepting  probably  some  verses,  had  been  connected  with 
the  work,  in  the  way  of  Pari^ish/as  or  Addenda,  about 
250  A.D.  or  earlier.  As  the  book,  along  with  the  Parii-ish/as, 
already  existed  some  time  before  250  A.D.,  we  may  safely 
conclude  that  the  more  ancient  text  in  21  chapters,  the 
epilogue  included,  dates  some  centuries  earlier.  Greater 
precision  is  for  the  present  impossible. 

We  know  that  a  commentary  on  the  Saddharma-pu;/</a- 
rika  was  composed  by  Vasubandhu^  The  date  of  that 
work,  not  yet  recovered,  it  seems,  must  fall  between  550 
and  600  A.D.,  or  at  least  not  much  earlier,  for  Vasubandhu's 
pupil  Guwaprabha  became  the  Guru  of  the  famous  Sn- 
Harsha,  alias  5iladitya,  king  of  Kanauj,  the  friend  of 
Hiouen  Thsang^.  The  latter  often  mentions  Vasubandhu 
and  some  of  that  great  doctor's  writings,  as  well  as  Gu/ia.- 
prabha^.  As  both  worthies  at  the  time  of  Hiouen  Thsang's 
visiting  India  had  already  departed  this  life,  and  Vasu- 
bandhu must  have  been  at  least  one  generation  older  than 
Gu;^aprabha,  we  cannot  be  far  amiss  in  assigning  to  Vasu- 
bandhu's commentary  the  date  above  specified. 

It  appears  from  the  above-mentioned  preface  to  the 
Chinese  translation  of  A.D.  601,  that  the  text-differences  in 
the  MSS.  current  in  those  days  were  more  important  than 
such  as  we  observe  in  the  Nepalese  MSS.  from  1000  A.D. 
downward,  with  which  the  Tibetan  closely  agree.  The 
Chinese  preface  is  so  interesting  that  it  is  worth  while  to 


1  Wassiljew,  Buddhismus,  p.  222.  This  was  written  before  the  publication 
of  my  Cambridge  Lectures, '  India,  what  can  it  teach  us?'  and  affords  valuable, 
because  independent,  confirmation  of  the  chronological  system  contained  in 
Note  G,  'Renaissance  of  Sanskrit  Literature,'  pp.  281-366. — The  Editor, 
F.  M.  M. 

^  Wassiljew,  Buddhismus,  p.  78  ;  of.  pp.  64  and  219  ;  Taranatha,  Geschichte 
des  Buddhismus  (transl.  Schiefner),  p.  126. 

^  See  especially  Histoire  de  la  vie  de  Hiouen  Thsang,  pp.  83, 93, 97, 1 14 ;  106. 


INTRODUCTION.  XXUI 


copy  a  passage  from  it  as  quoted  in  the  Catalogue  of  the 
Tripifeka^ : 

'The  translations  of  K\x  Fa-hu,  No.  138,  and  Kumara- 
^iva,  No.  134,  are  most  probably  made  from  two  different 
texts.  In  the  repository  of  the  Canon,  I  (the  author  of  the 
preface)  have  seen  two  texts  (or  copies  of  the  text,  of  the 
Saddharma-puw^arika) ;  one  is  written  on  the  palm  leaves, 
and  the  other  in  the  letters  of  Kwei-tsz',  or  Khara/^ar, 
Kumara^iva's  maternal  country.  The  former  text  exactly 
agrees  with  No.  138,  and  the  latter  with  No.  134,  No.  [38 
omits  only  the  Gathas  of  the  Samantamukha-parivarta, 
chap.  24.  But  No.  134  omits  half  of  the  Oshadhi- 
parivarta,  chap.  5?  the  beginning  of  the  Pai7>^abhikshuj-ata- 
vyakarawa-parivarta,  chap.  8,  and  that  of  the  Saddhar- 
mabhawaka-parivarta,  chap.  10,  and  the  Gathas  of  the 
Devadatta-parivarta,  chap.  I2^  and  those  of  the  Saman- 
tamukha-parivarta, chap.  25.  Moreover,  No.  134  puts  the 
Dharmaparyaya-parivarta  (the  last  chapter  of  the  Sutra) 
before  the  Bhaisha^ara^a-parivarta,  chap.  23.  Nos.  138 
and  134  both  place  the  Dharam-parivarta  next  to  the 
Samantamukha-parivarta,  chaps.  24  and  25  respectively. 
Beside  these,  there  are  minor  differences  between  the  text 
and  translation.  The  omission  of  the  Gathas  in  No.  134, 
chaps.  12  and  25,  have  since  been  filled  in  by  some  wise 
men,  whose  example  I  wish  to  follow.  In  the  first  year 
of  the  Zan-sheu  period,  A.D.  601,  I,  together  with  6^yTana- 
gupta  and  Dharmagupta,  have  examined  the  palm-leaf  text, 
at  the  request  of  a  6"rama7/a,  vShah-hhih,  and  found  that  the 
beginning  of  two  chapters,  8th  and  loth,  are  also  wanting 
in  the  text  (though  No.  138  contains  them).  Nevertheless 
we  have  increased  a  half  of  the  5th  chapter,  and  put  the 
1 2th  chapter  into  the  nth,  and  restored  the  Dharawi- 
parivarta  and  Dharmaparyaya-parivarta  to  their  proper 
order,  as  chaps.  21  and  27.  There  are  also  some  words 
and  passages  which  have  been  altered  (while  the  greater 


,^    *  Sutra  Pi/aka,  col.  45. 

^  In  the  Nepalese  MSS.  and  the  European  translations  the  latter  part  of 
chap.  xi. 


xxiv  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA. 


part  of  No,  134  is  retained).     The  reader  is  requested  not 
to  have  any  suspicion  about  these  differences.' 

According  to  the  opinion  of  an  eminent  Chinese  scholar, 
the  late  Stanislas  Julien,  the  translation  of  Kumara^iva 
widely  differs  from  Burnouf's.  He  gives  utterance  to  that 
opinion  in  a  letter  dated  June  12,  1866,  and  addressed  to 
Professor  Max  Miiller,  to  whose  obliging  kindness  it  is 
due  that  I  am  able  to  publish  a  specimen  of  Kumara^iva's 
version  rendered  into  French  by  Stanislas  Julien.  The 
fragment  answers  to  the  stanzas  1-22  of  chap.  iii.  As 
it  is  too  long  to  be  inserted  here,  I  give  it  hereafter  on 
page  xl. 

On  comparing  the  fragment  with  the  corresponding 
passages  in  Burnouf's  French  translation  and  the  English 
version  in  this  volume,  the  reader  cannot  fail  to  perceive 
that  the  discrepancies  between  the  two  European  versions 
are  fewer  and  of  less  consequence  than  between  each  of 
them  and  Kumara^iva's  work.  It  is  hardly  to  be  supposed 
that  the  text  used  by  Kumara^iva  can  have  differed  so 
much  from  ours,  and  it  seems  far  more  probable  that 
he  has  taken  the  liberty,  for  clearness  sake,  to  modify  the 
construction  of  the  verses,  a  literal  rendering  whereof,  it 
must  be  owned,  is  impossible  in  any  language.  It  is  a  pity 
that  Stanislas  Julien  has  chosen  for  his  specimen  a  frag- 
ment exclusively  consisting  of  Gathas.  A  page  in  prose 
would  have  been  far  more  useful  as  a  test  of  the  accuracy 
of  the  Chinese  version. 

Proceeding  to  treat  of  the  contents  of  our  Sutra,  I  begin  by 
quoting  the  passage  where  Burnouf,  in  his  usual  masterly 
way,  describes  the  general  character  of  the  book  and  the 
prominent  features  of  the  central  figure  in  it.  The  illus- 
trious French  scholar  writes  ^• 

'  La,  comme  dans  les  Sutras  simples,  c'est  ^akya  qui  est 
le  plus  important,  le  premier  des  etres ;  et  quoique  I'ima- 
gination  du  compilateur  Tait  doue  de  toutes  les  perfections 
de  science  et  de  vertu  admises  chez  les  Buddhistes ;  quoique 
Cakya  revete  deja  un  caractere  mythologique,  quand    il 

*  Introduction,  p.  119. 


INTRODUCTION.  XXV 


declare  qu'il  y  a  longtemps  qu'il  remplit  les  devoirs  d'un 
Buddha,  et  qu'il  doit  les  remplir  longtemps  encore,  malgr6 
sa  mort  prochaine,  laquelle  ne  detruit  pas  son  eternite  ; 
quoiqu'enfin  on  le  represente  creant  de  son  corps  des 
Buddhas  qui  sont  comme  les  images  et  les  reproductions 
ideales  de  sa  personne  mortelle,  nulle  part  ^akyamuni 
n'est  nomme  Dieu ;  nulle  part  il  ne  re9oit  le  titre  d'Adi- 
buddha.' 

To  this  I  have  nothing  to  object,  only  something  to  add. 
It  is  perfectly  true  that  6"akya  does  not  receive  the  simple 
title  of  Deva  ;  why?  Because  that  title  is  far  too  poor  for 
so  exalted  a  personage  who  is  the  Devatideva,  the  para- 
mount god  of  gods.  So  he  is  called  in  the  Lotus,  chap,  vii, 
St.  31  \  and  innumerable  times  in  the  whole  range  of  Bud- 
dhist literature,  both  in  Pali  and  Sanskrit  ^.  It  is  further 
undeniable  that  the  title  of  Adibuddha  does  not  occur  in 
the  Lotus,  but  it  is  intimated  that  6"akya  is  identical  with 
Adibuddha  in  the  words  :  'From  the  very  beginning  (adita 
e  V  a)  have  I  roused,  brought  to  maturity,  fully  developed  them 
(the  innumerable  Bodhisattvas)  to  be  fit  for  their  Bodhisattva 
position  ^.'     It  is  only  by  accommodation  that  he  is  called 

A 

Adibuddha,  he  properly  being  anadi,  i.e.  existing  from 
eternity,  having  no  beginning.  The  Buddha  most  solemnly 
declares  (chap,  xv)  that  he  reached  Bodhi  an  immense 
time  ago,  not  as  people  fancy,  first  at  Gaya.  From  the 
whole  manner  in  which  Sakya.  speaks  of  his  existence  in 
former  times,  it  is  perfectly  clear  that  the  author  wished  to 
convey  the  meaning  that  the  Lord  had  existed  from 
eternity,  or,  what  comes  to  the  same,  from  the  very  begin- 
ning, from  time  immemorial,  &c. 

6"akya  has  not  only  lived  an  infinite  number  of  ^Eons  in 
the  past,  he  is  to  live  for  ever.  Common  people  fancy  that 
he  enters  Nirva/za,  but  in  reality  he  only  makes  a  show  of 
Nirvawa  out  of  regard  for  the  weakness  of  men.     He,  the 

^  Bumouf  s  rendering  is  '  Deva  superieur  aux  Devas.' 

^  Less  frequent  than  devatideva  is  the  synonymous  devadhideva,  e.g. 
Lalita-vistara,  p.  131  ;  essentially  the  same  is  the  term  sarvadevottama,  the 
highest  of  all  gods,  ib.  p.  144. 

'  See  chap,  xiv,  p.  295. 


XXvi  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARiKA. 

Father  of  the  world  ^,  the  Self-born  One,  the  Chief  and 
Saviour^  of  creatures,  produces  a  semblance  of  Nirvana, 
whenever  he  sees  them  given  to  error  and  folly  ^.  In  reality 
his  being  is  not  subject  to  complete  Nirvawa ;  it  is  only  by 
a  skilful  device  that  he  makes  a  show  of  it ;  and  repeatedly 
he  appears  in  the  world  of  the  living,  though  his  real  abode 
is  on  the  summit  of  the  Gr/dhrakfi/a '*.  All  this  is,  in 
other  words,  the  teaching  of  Naraya;/a  in  Bhagavad-gita  IV, 
6  seqq. : 

A^o  'pi  sann  avyayatma  bhutanam  \sva.Yo  'pi  san, 
prakritbn  svam  adhish///aya  sambhavamy  atmamayaya. 
yada-yada  hi  dharmasya  glanir  bhavati,  Bharata, 
abhyutthanam  adharmasya  tadatmanaw  srz^^amy  aham. 
paritra;/aya  sadhund;;^  vinaj-aya  ka.  dushkrz'tam, 
dharmasawzsthapanarthaya  sambhavami  yuge-yuge. 
The  Buddha  is  anthropomorphic,  of  course ;  what  god  is 
not?     The  Lotus,  far  from  giving  prominence  to  the  un- 
avoidable human  traits,  endeavours  as  much  as  possible  to 
represent  the  Lord  and  his  audience  as  superhuman  beings. 
In  chap,  xiv  there  is  a  great  pause,  as  in  a  drama,  of  no 
less  than  fifty  intermediate  kalpas,  during  which  5akya- 
muni  and  all  his  hearers  keep  silence  ^.     A  second  pause 
of  looo^  or  according  to  a  various  reading,  100,000  years 
is  held  in  chap.  xx.     Now  it  is  difficult  to  conceive  that 
any  author,  wilfully  and    ostentatiously,  would    mention 
such  traits  if  he  wished  to  impress  the  reader  with  the 
notion  that  the  narrative  refers  to  human  beings. 

It  will  not  be  necessary  to  multiply  examples.    There 
is,  to  my  comprehension,  not  the  slightest  doubt  that  the 

*  Cf.  Kr/sh«a  declaring  of  himself  in  Bhagavad-gita  IX,  17 :  Pitaham  g-agato 
mata  dhata  pilamaha^.  Cf.  XI,  43.  The  significant  title  of  Pitamaha  is  given 
to  Buddha  in  an  inscription  found  at  Dooriya  (Bitha)  ;  Cunningham,  Archa;ol. 
Survey,  vol.  iii,  pi.  xviii ;  cf.  p.  48. 

^  Like  Naraya^a  in  Bhagavad-gita  XII,  7 :  Tesham  aham  samuddharta- 
mntyusawsarasagarat. 

3  Chap.  XV.  St.  21.  *  Chap,  xv,  st.  6,  10. 

5  One  intermediate  kalpa  is,  in  the  system,  equal  to  8  yugas.  As  4  yugas 
number  4,320,000  years,  it  follows  that  the  pause  lasted  432  millions  of  years. 
Esoterically,  kalpa  has  certainly  denoted  a  short  interval  of  time,  but  even 
if  we  take  the  '  intermediate  kalpa '  to  mean,  in  reality,  a  lapse  of  time  equal 
to  a  few  hours,  the  pause  would  not  refer  to  an  historical  event. 


INTRODUCTION.  XXVIl 


Saddharma-pu;^^arika  intends  to  represent  vSakya  as  the 
supreme  being,  as  the  god  of  gods,  almighty  and  all-wise. 
But  what  have  we  to  understand  by  the  words  '  god '  and 
'god  of  gods?'  that  is  the  question.  To  find  the  answer 
let  us  recall  to  memory  the  theosophic  notions  prevailing 
in  ancient  India  at  certain  periods. 

In  general  it  may  be  said  that  the  Upanishads  recognise 
two  supreme  beings,  which  in  a  mystical  way  are  somehow 
identified ;  one  is  the  great  illuminator  of  the  macrocosm, 
and  is  sometimes  called  the  Sun,  at  other  times  Ether ;  the 
other,  the  enlightener  of  the  microcosm,  is  Mind  or  Reason  ^. 
As  soon  as  the  Sun  ceased  to  be  considered  an  animate 
being  or  to  be  represented  as  such,  he  might  continue,  for 
worship's  sake,  honoris  causa,  to  be  called  the  highest 
god;  the  really  remaining  deity  was  Reason,  poetically 
termed  the  inward  light.  This  idea  is  expressed  by  Nila- 
ka«//^a  in  his  commentary  on  Bhagavad-gita  V,  14,  in  the 
following  terms:  Prabhuj-  ^idatma  surya  ivasmada- 
dinam  prakai-aka/z,  the  Lord  (is)  the  intelligent  Self  that 
like  a  sun  is  the  illuminator  of  ourselves  and  others  ^.  Now 
the  same  author,  in  his  notes  on  Bhagavad-gita  VI,  30,  dis- 
tinctly states  that  our  inward  consciousness,  or  as  he  puts 
it,  the  pratyagatman,  the  individual  Self,  otherwise  called 
^iva,  is  Narayawa,  i.e.  the  supreme  being.  At  IX,  28  he 
paraphrases  Naraya^a  by  sarvesham  pratyagatman, 
the  individual  consciousness  of  all  (sentient  beings);  at 
XII,  14  he  identifies  Narayawa  with  nirguwam  brahma. 
Just  as  here  and  there  Naraya/^a  is  represented  as  clad  in 
all  the  glory  and  majesty  of  a  sovereign,  as  the  illuminator, 
the  vivifier  of  the  world,  in  one  word  as  the  sun,  so  we  find 
6'akyamuni  invested  with  all  the  grandeur  and  all  the 
resources  of  a  ruler  of  nature.  Philosophically,  both  Nara- 
yana.  and  his  counterpart  5akyamuni  are  purushottama, 
paramatman,  the  highest  brahman.  Mind.     5akyamuni 

*  See  e.  g.  A'Aandogya-upanishad  III,  i8  and  19  ;  cf.  Bhagavad-gita  XV,  12. 

'^  Cf.  Bhagavad-gita  XIII,  33:  yatha  prakasayaty  eka.h  kntsnam  lokam  ima.m 
raviA,  kshetraw  kshetri  tatha  kWtsnam  prakasayati,  Bharata.  The  kshetra 
here  is  the  body,  the  kshetrin  is  Mind,  Reason,  at  man.  Cf.  .Sankara  on 
A'Aandogya-upanishad,  1.  c. 


XXviii  SADDHARMA-PUA^DARIKA. 


is,  esoterically,  the  very  same  muni,  the  beholder  of  good 
and  evil,  the  puwyapapekshita  muni  that  is  spoken  of 
in  Manu  VIII,  91.  It  is  acknowledged  in  Bhagavad-gita  IX, 
14  seqq.  that  the  supreme  being  may  be  conceived  and  re- 
spected in  different  ways  according  to  the  degree  of  intelli- 
gence of  creatures.  Some  pay  their  worship  by  leading  a 
virtuous  life,  others  by  pious  devotion,  others  by  contem- 
plation, others  by  confessing  a  strictly  monistic  philosophy^, 
others  by  acknowledging  a  personal  god  ^.  The  Lord  in 
the  Saddharma-puw^arika  admits  of  being  viewed  in  all 
these  various  aspects.  Whether  the  Buddha-theory,  such 
as  we  find  it  developed  in  the  Sutra,  not  in  plain  words, 
indeed,  but  by  circumlocutions  and  ambiguities,  should  be 
called  atheistic  or  not,  is  a  matter  of  comparatively  slight 
importance,  about  which  opinions  may  differ.  This  much, 
however,  may  be  asserted,  that  the  Lotus  and  the  Bhagavad- 
gita  are,  in  this  respect,  exactly  on  a  par. 

The  conclusion  arrived  at  is  that  the  5akyamuni  of  the 
Lotus  is  an  ideal,  a  personification,  and  not  a  person.  Traits 
borrowed,  or  rather  surviving,  from  an  older  cosmological 
mythology,  and  traces  of  ancient  nature-worship  abound 
both  in  the  Lotus  and  the  Bhagavad-gita,  but  in  the 
highest  sense  of  the  word,  paramarthatas,  the  Purushot- 
tamain  both  is  the  centre  of  mental  life.  It  is  just  possible 
that  the  ancient  doctors  of  the  Mahayana  have  believed 
that  such  an  ideal  once  walked  in  the  flesh  here  on  earth, 
but  the  impression  left  by  the  spirit  and  the  letter  of  the 
whole  work  does  not  favour  that  supposition.  In  later 
times  fervent  adherents  of  the  Mahayana  really  held  that 
belief,  as  we  know  from  the  example  of  the  pious  Hiouen 
Thsang,  who  was  evidently  as  earnest  in  his  belief  that  the 
Lord  once  trod  the  soil  of  India  as  he  was  convinced  of 
Ma;7^uj-ri,  Maitreya,  and  Avalokite^vara  existing  as  ani- 
mated beings.  Whether  the  system  of  the  Lotus  can  be 
said  to  agree  with  what  is  supposed  to  be  'genuine'  Bud- 

*  The  followers  of  the  Upanishads,  Aupanishadas,  who  say,'  Myself  am  God,' 
or  as  Nilaka;i//ia  puts  it, '  Myself  am  the  Lord  Vasudeva.' 

^  According  to  Nilaka«<Aa  the  common  people,  who  think,  '  He,  the  Lord, 
is  my  Master,' 


INTRODUCTION.  XXIX 


dhism,  it  is  not  here  the  place  to  discuss.  So  far  as  the 
Northern  Church  is  concerned,  the  book  must  be  acknow- 
ledged as  the  very  cream  of  orthodoxy ;  it  is  the  last,  the 
supreme,  the  most  sublime  of  the  Sutras  exposed  by  the 
Lord;  it  is,  so  to  say,  the  jiromawi,  the  crown  jewel,  of 
all  Sutras^ 

The  contents  of  the  separate  chapters  into  which  the 
Sutra  is  divided  may  be  described,  summarily,  as  follows : 

1.  Prologue. 

2.  Awakening  of  the  Lord  from  his  mystic  trance ; 
display  of  his  transcendent  skilfulness,  proved  by  the  ap- 
parent trinity  of  vehicles,  whereas  in  reality  there  is  but 
one  vehicle. 

3.  Prophecy  of  the  Lord  regarding  the  future  destiny  of 
5ariputra,  his  eldest  son.  Second  turn  of  the  wheel  of  the 
law  on  that  occasion,  with  incidental  commemoration  of 
the  first  turn  near  Benares.  Parable  of  the  burning  house, 
to  exemplify  the  skill  of  the  good  father  in  saving  his 
children  from  the  burning  pains  of  mundane  existence. 

4.  Another  parable,  exemplifying  the  skill  of  the  wise 
father  in  leading  a  child  that  has  gone  astray  and  lost  all 
self-respect  back  to  a  feeling  of  his  innate  nobility  and  to 
happiness. 

5-  Parable  of  the  plants  and  the  rain,  to  exemplify  the 
impartiality  and  equal  care  of  the  Lord  for  all  creatures^. 
Parable  of  the  blind  man,  to  intimate  that  the  phenomena 
have  but  an  apparent  reality,  and  that  the  ultimate  goal  of 
all  endeavours  must  be  to  reach  all-knowingness,  which  in 
fact  is  identical  with  complete  nescience. 

6.  Sundry  predictions  as  proofs  of  the  power  of  the 
Sugata  to  look  into  the  future. 

7.  He  has  an  equal  knowledge  of  the  remotest  past ;  his 
remembrance  of  the  turning  of  the  wheel  by  the  Tathagata 
Mahabhi^;la^/Ianabhibhil.  Edifying  history  of  the  sixteen 
sons  of  the  said  Tathagata. 

^  Chap,  xiii,  st.  53  seq. 

*  Cf.  Bhagavad-gita  IX,  29,  where  Naraya«a  declares :  '  I  am  equal  towards 
all  creatures,  none  is  hateful  to  me,  none  beloved;'  same  'ham  sarvabhute- 


shu,  na  me  dveshyo  'sti  na  priyaA. 


XXX  SADDHARMA-PUJVDARiKA. 

8.  Prophecy  regarding  five  hundred  Arhats. 

9.  Prophecy  concerning  Ananda^  Rahula,  and  the  two 
thousand  monks. 

10.  The  Lord  teaches  how  pious  preachers  bf  the  law, 
who  will  come  in  after-times,  ought  to  be  duly  honoured, 
and  promises  that  he  will  always  protect  the  ministers  of 
religion. 

1 1.  Display  of  the  miraculous  power  of  vSakyamuni  shown 
in  the  appearance  of  a  Stupa,  which,  being  opened  by  him, 
discloses  to  sight  the  frame  of  the  expired  Tathagata  Pra- 
bhutaratna,  who  is  desirous  of  hearing  the  exposition  of  the 
Lotus  of  the  True  Law.  How  vSakyamuni  in  a  former  birth 
strove  to  acquire  the  Lotus.  His  great  obligations  to  Deva- 
datta.  Episode  of  the  wise  daughter  of  the  Ocean  and  her 
change  of  sex. 

la.  Prediction  to  Gautami,  Yai-odhara,  and  the  nuns  in 
their  train.  Promise  of  the  host  of  disciples  and  Bodhisat- 
tvas  to  take  up  the  difficult  task  of  preaching  the  holy 
word  in  days  to  come,  after  the  Lord's  Nirva;/a. 

13.  Vocation  of  the  ministers  of  religion,  and  practical 
rules  for  their  conduct  in  and  out  of  society.  Parable  of 
the  king  who  rewards  his  valiant  warriors ;  in  the  same 
manner  the  Buddha  will  reward  those  who  struggle  for  his 
sake,  by  bestowing  upon  them  all  kinds  of  favours,  at  last 
the  most  valuable  of  his  boons — eternal  rest. 

14.  Splendid  phantasmagory  of  innumerable  Bodhisat- 
tvas  evoked  by  the  creative  power  of  the  Lord.  Long 
pause,  during  which  the  Tathagata  and  the  four  classes  of 
hearers  are  silent.  Perplexity  of  Maitreya  on  hearing  that 
the  innumerable  Bodhisattvas  have  all  been  the  pupils  of  the 
Lord. 

15.  The  Buddha  explains  the  fact  by  revealing  the 
immense  duration  of  his  lifetime,  in  the  past  and  the 
future. 

16.  Meritoriousness  of  the  belief  in  the  immense  duration 
of  the  Tathagatas  and  all  those  who  have  once  become 
Buddhas. 

17.  The  Lord  details  the  great  merit  attending  a  ready 
acceptance  of  the  preaching  of  the  law. 


INTRODUCTION.  XXXI 


1 8.  Exposition  of  the  advantages,  worldly  and  spiritual, 
enjoyed  by  the  ministers  of  religion. 

19.  Story  of  Sadaparibhuta,  exemplifying  the  superiority 
of  simple-mindedness  and  pure-heartedness  to  worldly 
wisdom  and  scepticism. 

20.  Grand  show  exhibited  by  the  two  Tathagatas  6"akya- 
muni  and  Prabhutaratna  conjointly \  Pause  after  the 
performance.  After  the  pause  a  great  stir  amongst  gods, 
celestial  and  infernal  beings,  men,  &c.  ^  The  Tathagata 
extols  the  Sutra  of  the  Lotus  in  which  '  all  Buddha-laws 
are  succinctly  taught,'  as  well  as  the  keepers  of  this  most 
eminent  of  Sutras. 

Immediately  after  this  chapter  may  have  followed,  in  the 
oldest  version,  the  epilogue  entitled  'Period  of  the  Law;' 
the  reasons  for  this  opinion  have  been  already  stated  above. 
The  supposed  additional  chapters  contain  the  following 
topics,  briefly  indicated : 

21.  Efficacy  of  talismanic  spells  (Dharawis). 

22.  Self-sacrifice  of  the  Bodhisattva  Sarvasattvapriyadar- 
.yana,  otherwise  called  Bhaisha^yara^a.  Glorification  of  the 
Lotus  as  the  most  eminent  of  Sutras. 

23.  Visit  of  the  Bodhisattva  Gadgadasvara  to  the  Saha- 
world.  Extraordinary  qualities  and  achievements  of  this 
worthy,  incidentally  narrated  by  the  Tathagata.  Return 
of  the  Bodhisattva  to  whence  he  came. 

24.  Grandeur  and  ubiquitousness  of  Avalokitei'vara. 

25.  Wonderful  and  edifying  story  of  the  conversion  of 
the  king  vSubhavyuha  through  the  instrumentality  of  his 
two  sons  Vimalagarbha  and  Vimalanetra,  al.  Bhaisha^yara^a 
and  Bhaisha^yasamudgata. 

26.  The  Bodhisattva  Samantabhadra  charges  himself 
with  the  task  of  being  a  protector  to  the  preachers  of 
religion  in  after-times  after  the  Lord's  Nirvana  ^. 

^  Both  stretch  their  flaming  tongues  as  far  as  the  Brahma-world.  In  the 
Bhagavad-gita  XI,  30  it  is  said  of  Naraya«a,  when  at  the  request  of  Arjo-una  he 
shows  himself  in  his  fuU  grandeur :  lelihyase  grasamanaA  samantal  lokan 
samagran  vadanair  ^aladbhiA,  te^obhir  apurya  gagat  samagram  bhasas  tavo- 
graA  prapatanti,  Vish«o  ! 

^  Cf.  Bhagavad-gita  XI,  15. 

'  There  is  some  incongruity  between  this  chapter  and  chapter  x,  because 


XXxii  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA. 

This  summary,  however  meagre,  will  be  sufficient  to  show 
that  there  is  no  lack  of  variety  in  our  Sutra.  We  may,  indeed, 
be  satisfied  that  the  compilers  of  it  intended  giving  an  ex- 
position of  the  principal  truths  of  their  religion  in  general, 
and  of  the  peculiar  tenets  of  their  own  system^  in  parti- 
cular, the  whole  with  anxious  care  arranged  in  such  a  form 
that  the  Sutra  admitted  of  an  exoterical  and  esoterical 
interpretation.  It  contains  a  revelation  of  the  state  of 
things  in  the  present,  as  well  as  in  the  past  and  the  future, 
a  revelation  derived  from  a  virtually  eternal  source,  so  that 
the  doctrine  taught  in  it  must  be  deemed  valid  not  only  for 
a  certain  spiritual  brotherhood  or  church,  but  for  the  human 
race  at  large.  The  highest  authority  to  whom  the  doctrine 
is  referred,  is  not  a  certain  individual  having  lived  a  short 
span  of  time  somewhere  in  India,  but  the  sublime  being  who 
has  his  constant  abode  on  the  Gn'dhraku/a,  i.e.  he  who  is 
the  terminology  of  other  Indian  creeds  is  called  Ku/astha. 

As  a  general  rule  it  may  be  said  that  in  such  works  of 
ancient  Indian  literature  as  are  anonymous,  we  must  distin- 
guish between  the  authority  and  the  author.  In  the  Lotus 
we  meet  after  the  invocation  in  some  MSS.  the  following 
distich : 

Vaipulyasutrara^am  paramarthanayavataranirdei-am  I 
Saddharmapuwfl'arikaw  sattvaya  mahapathaw  vakshye  ii 
I.e.  '  I  shall  proclaim  the  king  of  the  Vaipulya-sutras,  that 
teacheth  how  one  arrives  at  the  (right)  method  of  attaining 
the  highest  truth  ;  the  Saddharma-puw^^arika,  the  great  road 
(leading)  to  substantiality  (being  in  abstracto).'  The 
person  here  speaking  is  not  the  Buddha,  who  is  neither 
the  author  nor  the  writer  of  the  work.  Have  we  then  to 
ascribe  the  distich  to  one  of  the  ancient  copyists  ?  Burnouf  ^ 
decidedly  thinks  so,  and  his  opinion  is  corroborated  by  the 
fact  that  the  verses  do  not  occur  in  all  MSS.     I  must  con- 


in  the  latter  it  is  the  Lord  himself  who  promises  to  be  in  future  the  protector 
of  the  preachers. 

1  I.e.  of  the  Mahayana,  which  according  to  Taranatha,  Geschichte  des 
Buddhismus,  p.  274,  stands  above  the  division  of  the  Bauddhas  into  various 
schools. 

*  Lotus,  p.  285, 


INTRODUCTION.  XXXlll 


fess  that  I  am  not  so  sure  of  it.  As  the  Sutra,  like  other 
compositions  of  the  kind,  begins  with  the  solemn  '  Thus 
have  I  heard,  &c.,'  it  is  at  least  possible  that  the  distich 
belongs  to  the  compiler.  I  am  not  aware  that  the  scribes 
were  in  the  habit  of  using  such  expressions  as  V2,k  or 
synonymous  terms  instead  of  likh,  to  write;  and  as  we 
find  in  the  Mahavastu  similar  futures  as  vakshye,  viz. 
udirayishyavw  and  upavar;/ayishyami  ^  where  they 
can  hardly  be  imputed  to  the  scribe,  it  is  safer  to  leave 
the  question,  whether  the  opening  distich  of  the  Lotus  is 
the  work  of  a  compiler  or  of  a  copyist,  undecided,  the 
more  so  because  the  parallel  phrase  athato  —  vyakhya- 
syama/z,  frequently  found  immediately  after  the  invoca- 
tion, in  non-Buddhistic  writings,  must  be  held  to  refer  to 
the  author  or  authors,  compilers. 

The  Lotus  being  one  of  the  standard  works  of  the  Maha- 
yana,  the  study  of  it  cannot  but  be  useful  for  the  right 
appreciation  of  that  remarkable  system.  A  perusal  of  the 
book  will  convince  the  reader  that  a  statement  of  Professor 
Wassiljew's^  can  only  be  accepted  with  some  restrictions, 
when  this  scholar,  so  profoundly  versed  in  the  history  and 
development  of  Northern  Buddhism,  says  that  the  Buddha 
of  the  Mahayana  is  '  neither  the  creator  nor  the  ruler  of 
the  world ;  he  remains  the  same  cold,  indifferent  egoist, 
absorbed  in  Nothingness.'  The  Tathagata  of  the  Lotus 
is  passionless,  indeed,  but  that  does  not  involve  his  being 
an  egoist.  In  general  it  may  be  said  that  the  spirit  of  the 
Mahayana  is  more  universal,  its  ideal  less  monastical  than 
the  Hinayana's.  According  to  Professor  Rhys  Davids  we 
must  not  seek  the  superior  vital  power  which  enabled  the 
Great  Vehicle  to  outlive  the  earlier  teaching  in  certain  meta- 
physical subtleties,  but  in  the  idea  of  a  desire  to  save  all 
living  creatures;  'the  idea,' to  quote  his  own  words ^, 'as 
summarised  in  the  theory  of  Bodisatship,  is  the  key-note 
of  the  later  school,  just  as  Arahatship  is  the  key-note  of 


*  Mahavastu  (ed.  Senart),  p.  i,  with  the  remarks  of  the  editor,  and  p.  9. 

*  In  his  Buddhismus,  p.  126. 

^  In  Lectures  on  the  Origin  and  Growth  of  Religion,  p.  254. 
[2.]  C 


XXxiv  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARfKA. 

early  Buddhism.'  The  Mahayana  doctors  said  in  efifect : 
'We  grant  you  all  you  say  about  the  bliss  of  attaining 
Nirvana  in  this  life^.  But  it  produces  advantage  only  to 
yourselves ;  and  according  to  your  own  theory  there  will 
be  a  necessity  for  Buddhas  in  the  future  as  much  as  there 
has  been  for  Buddhas  in  the  past.  Greater,  better,  nobler 
then,  than  the  attainment  of  Arahatship  must  be  the  at- 
tainment of  Bodisatship  from  a  desire  to  save  all  living 
creatures  in  the  ages  that  will  come.'  The  teaching  of  the 
Lotus,  however,  is  different,  and  comes  to  this,  that  every 
one  should  try  to  become  a  Buddha.  It  admits  that  from 
a  practical  point  of  view  one  may  distinguish  three  means, 
so-called  Vehicles,  yanas,  to  attain  the  summum  bonum, 
Nirva;2a,  although  in  a  higher  sense  there  is  only  one  Vehicle. 
These  means  are,  in  plain  language,  piety,  philosophy  or 
rather  Yogism,  and  striving  for  the  enlightenment  and  weal 
of  our  fellow-creatures  ;  these  means  are  designated  by  the 
terms  of  Vehicle  of  (obedient)  hearers  or  disciples,  of  Pratye- 
kabuddhas,  and  of  Bodhisattvas.  Higher  than  piety  is  true 
and  self-acquired  knowledge  of  the  eternal  laws ;  higher 
than  knowledge  is  devoting  oneself  to  the  spiritual  weal  of 
others'^.  The  higher  unity  embracing  the  three  separate 
Vehicles  is  the  Buddha-vehicle. 

The  title  of  Bodhisattva  is  not  always  used  in  the  same 
acceptation.     Apart  from  a  broad  distinction  we  can  draw 

'  It  may  be  observed  that  there  is  nothing  peculiarly  Buddhistic  in  the 
searching  for  Nirvawa  in  this  life,  except  in  the  sound  of  the  word.  It  is  exactly 
the  same  as  what  other  Indian  enthusiasts  or  mystics  called  Givanmukti,  the 
aim  of  Yogins  in  the  fourth  degree  (answering  to  the  Arhats  of  the  Buddhists) 
and  of  the  Brahmans  or  Dvig-as  in  the  fourth  Asrama. 

^  See  chap,  iii,  p.  80.  Something  similar  in  Bhagavad-gita  XII,  12  :  sreyo  hi 
giia.na.m  abhyasa^  guanad  dhyanaw  visishyate,  dhyanat  karmaphalatyagas 
tyaga^  Mantir  anantaram  ;  and  IV,  5  :  labhante  brahmanirva^am  riihaytih  kshi- 
wakalmashaA,  WUiinadvaidha  yatatmanaA  sarvabhutahite  rataA.  Neither 
in  these  passages  of  the  Bhagavad-gita  nor  in  the  three  Vehicles  is  there 
anything  new;  abhyasa,  study,  denotes  the  period  of  one's  studying  under  a 
master,  the  BrahmaHriship,  which  the  Lotus  calls  the  Vehicle  of  Disciples ;  the 
period  of  dhyaua,  alias  the  Vehicle  of  Pratyekabuddhas,  coincides  with  the 
third  A«rama,  that  of  Vanaprastha ;  the  tyaga,  alias  Bodhisattvaship,  is 
virtually  the  same  with  the  life  of  a  Sannyasin,  Yati,  or  Mukta.  Gn  ana. 
characterises  the  second  Asrama;  in  the  Lotus  it  is  merged  in  or  combined 
with  dhyana. 


INTRODUCTION.  XXXV 


between  human  and  superhuman  Bodhisattvas^ — the  latter 
are  here  left  out  of  account — we  find  sometimes  the  word 
applied  to  those  persons  who  in  the  passage  of  our  Sutra 
alluded  to  are  styled  5ravakas,  hearers,  learners.  This 
appears  to  be  the  case  at  least  in  Nepal,  as  we  know  from 
the  following  passage  ^ :  '  The  Buddha  is  the  adept  in  the 
wisdom  of  Buddhism  (Bodhijnana),  whose  first  duty,  so 
long  as  he  remains  on  earth,  is  to  communicate  his  wisdom 
to  those  who  are  willing  to  receive  it.  These  willing  learners 
are  the  "  Bodhisattvas,"  so  called  from  their  hearts  being 
inclined  to  the  wisdom  of  Buddhism,  and  "  Sanghas,"  from 
their  companionship  with  one  another,  and  with  their 
Buddha  or  teacher,  in  the  vi  haras  or  ccenobitical  esta- 
blishments. The  Bodhisattva  or  Sangha  continues  to  be 
such  until  he  has  surmounted  the  very  last  grade  of  that 
vast  and  laborious  ascent  by  which  he  is  instructed  that 
he  can  "scale  the  heavens,"  and  pluck  immortal  wisdom 
from  its  resplendent  source :  which  achievement  performed, 
he  becomes  a  Buddha,  that  is,  an  Omniscient  Being.' 

Here  the  Bodhisattvas  are  plainly  distinguished  from  the 
ccenobitical  monks  ;  they  are  so  likewise  in  the  Lotus  ^,  in 
which  we  find  them  also  in  the  function  of  learned  or  wise 
men  (Paw^itas),  of  preachers  or  ministers  of  religion.  Was- 
siljew  I.e.  remarks  about  the  Bodhisattva — the  terrestrial 
one  of  course — that  '  from  one  side,  he  seems  to  be  the 
substitute  of  the  ancient  Bhikshu  ; '  from  which  we  ought 
not  to  infer  that  the  mendicant  monks,  as  such,  ceased  to 
exist,  for  that  is  notoriously  not  the  case,  but  that  the 
Bodhisattvas  were  charged  with  the  office  of  preaching. 
They  are  persons  who  deserve  to  be  honoured  both  by 
mendicant  monks  and  lay  devotees  *,  and  formed,  it  would 
seem,  a  kind  of  learned  clergy,  not  to  be  confounded,  how- 
ever, with  the  modern  Va^ra-A/^aryas  or  married  clergy- 
men in  Nepal.     There  is  reason  to  suppose  that  one  of  the 


*  Cf.  Wassiljew,  Buddhismus,  p.  124. 

"^  B.  H.  Hodgson,  Essays,  p.  62.    Cf.  Stanislas  Julien,  Voyages  des  Pelerins 
bouddhistes,  II,  p.  436  note. 

3  See  especially  the  whole  of  chapter  x.  *  Lotus,  chap,  x,  st.  27  seq. 

C  2 


XXXVl  SADDHARMA-PUiVZ)ARIKA. 


honorific  titles  given  to  the  preachers  or  interpreters  of  the 
law  was  'wise'  or  'learned  man,'  Tandita.,  for  the  word  is 
so  often  applied  to  them  that  it  looks  more  like  a  title 
than  a  common  epithet  ^  Taranatha  knows  Pa«<^ita  to  be 
a  title  ^,  and  considers  it  to  be  the  equivalent  of  the  older 
Mahabhadanta  ;  he  distinguishes  '  Bodhisattvas'  from  'com- 
mon Pa;/^itas'  and  'Arhats.'  How  does  this  agree  with 
the  data  in  the  Lotus?  As  it  has  been  intimated  in  a 
foregoing  note,  the  three  Vehicles  are  imitations  of  three 
Aj-ramas  or  stages  in  the  model  life  of  an  Arya,  in  the  first 
place  of  a  Brahman.  The  stages  are  that  of  a  student,  of 
a  hermit  living  in  the  forest,  and  of  a  Sannyasin,  Yati,  or 
Mukta,  who  has  wholly  given  up  the  world.  The  second 
stage,  that  of  a  householder,  does  not  exist,  of  course,  for 
those  who  vow  themselves  to  a  monastic  life.  Our  Sutra 
does  not  prescribe  that  the  three  stages  must  be  gone 
through  by  the  same  persons,  no  more  than  the  Bhagavad- 
gita  I.e.  requires  that  one  should  pass  the  stages  of  study, 
knowledge,  and  meditation  before  resolving  upon  com- 
plete renunciation  (tyaga) ;  what  follows  from  the  context 
is  only  this,  that  the  Vehicle  of  Bodhisattvas,  alias  those 
who  strive  for  the  weal  of  all  creatures,  is  superior  to  the 
two  preceding  Vehicles.  The  Vehicle  of  the  Bodhisattvas 
being  the  loftiest  of  the  three,  they  themselves  must  be 
considered  as  occupying  the  highest  rank.  Now  Taranatha 
places  the  Arhats  above  them,  and  with  the  Nepalese  also 
the  first  class  of  the  monastic  order  is  that  of  Arhat  ^.  The 
question  is,  how  are  we  to  judge  of  the  relation  between 
Arhats  and  Bodhisattvas  in  the  Lotus?  As  far  as  I  am 
able  to  see,  the  compiler*  of  the  Sutra  describes  facts,  or 
supposed  facts,  which  he  knew  from  oral  or  literary  tradi- 
tion, as  having  occurred  in  the  past,  whereas  the  actual 
state  of  things  in  his  own  time  and  shortly  before  is  repre- 
sented as  that  of  the  future.  His  Arhats  are  sages  of  the 
past,  canonized  saints ;  his  human  Bodhisattvas  are  sages, 

»  E.g.  Lotus,  chap,  x,  st.  4,  cf.  6 ;  23,  33 ;  .xiii,  13,  16,  24,  26,  30,  32,  39,44. 

*  Geschichte  des  Buddhismus,  p.  60. 
^  Hodgson,  Essays,  p.  52  ;  cf.  p.  30. 

*  The  reader  should  not  lay  stress  upon  this  singular. 


INTRODUCTION.  XXXVll 


wise  men  of  the  present,  most  reverend  worthies  who  should 
live  a  saintly  life  and  generally  do  so,  but  who,  however 
sanctimonious,  are  not  acknowledged  saints.  Of  an  anta- 
gonism between  Arhats  and  Bodhisattvas  there  is  no  trace 
in  the  book  ;  the  Arhats  being  dead,  they  cannot  be  active  ; 
the  Bodhisattvas  as  living  persons,  can\  In  a  certain 
respect,  then,  the  remark  of  Professor  Rhys  Davids  holds 
good;  the  Bodhisattvas  represent  the  ideal  of  spiritual 
activity,  the  Arhats  of  inactivity.  It  must  be  admitted 
that  the  Lotus,  as  a  whole,  breathes  a  less  monastic  and 
ascetic^  spirit ;  it  does  not  go  the  length  to  speak  of  ascetism 
and  mortification  in  such  scornful  terms  as  the  Bhagavad- 
gita^  does,  but  at  the  same  time  it  never  extols  it.  There 
are  in  the  book  many  indications  that  the  art  of  preaching 
was  made  much  of  and  highly  developed,  and  it  may  be 
supposed  that  a  greater  proficiency  in  hermeneutics  com- 
bined with  superior  mental  activity  has  enabled  the  Maha- 
yana  to  supplant  its  rival,  the  Hinayana,  and  to  extend  its 
spiritual  conquests  once  from  the  snows  of  Siberia  to  the 
luxuriant  islands  of  the  Indian  Archipelago. 

After  having  touched  upon  such  points  in  the  text  of 
the  Saddharma-puw^arika  as  seemed  to  require  more 
special  notice,  it  behoves  me  to  say  a  few  words  about  the 
translation  and  its  resources.  In  the  first  place,  I  must 
declare  that  I  cannot  speak  in  too  warm  terms  of  the 
benefit  I  have  derived  from  the  French  translation  by  the 
illustrious  Burnouf.  I  have  taken  that  work  throughout 
for  my  model,  without  having  been  able  to  reach  its 
excellency.  The  material  discrepancies  between  his  trans- 
lation are  partly  due  to  my  having  followed  other  MSS., 
partly  to  another  interpretation,  especially  of  frequently  cor- 
rupt and  difficult  Gathas.    If  some  reader  not  acquainted 

*  Something  of  contempt  for  the  Arhats  is  shown  in  the  story  communicated 
by  Hiouen  Thsang  in  Voyages  des  Pelerins  bouddhistes,  II,  p.  176,  where  the 
editor  inadvertently  writes  Vasubandhu  instead  of  Vasumitra  ;  his  index  affords 
the  means  of  correcting  the  mistake ;  cf.  Wassiljew  in  Taranatha,  p.  298. 

^  See  chap,  xiii,  28,  where  the  eighth  commandment  of  the  Dasasila,  for- 
bidding the  use  of  ointment,  is  slighted. 

3  See  there  xvii,  5  seqq.,  and  cf.  14  seqq.,  where  we  are  taught  what  the  true 
tapas  should  be. 


XXXVlll  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARlKA. 


with  the  peculiar  difficulties  of  those  Gathas  should 
wonder  at  the  occurrence  of  numerous  discrepancies,  I 
would  repeat  the  words  of  the  preface  to  the  Chinese 
version  from  A.D.  6oi,  and  request  him  'not  to  have  any 
suspicion  about  these  differences.'  Let  him  compare  the 
fragment  from  Kumara^iva's  rendering  on  page  xl  with 
the  corresponding  passages  in  the  French  and  English 
translations,  and  he  will  observe  that  the  difference 
between  the  work  of  the  learned  Buddhist  of  the  fourth 
century  and  the  two  European  versions  is  far  more  con- 
siderable than  between  the  latter. 

The  base  of  my  translation  has  been  an  old  manuscript 
on  palm  leaves,  belonging  to  Dr.  D.  Wright's  collection, 
in  the  University  Library  of  Cambridge.  The  manuscript 
is  dated  Newar,  era  159  (  =  A.D.  1039),  and  was  written  in 
the  reign  of  the  king  Kamadeva  (?),  in  the  bright  half  of 
the  month  Vai^akha,  on  a  Thursday  ^  It  is  one  of  the 
most  ancient  Sanskrit  MSS.  existing  in  Europe,  and  there- 
fore I  thought  that  it  was  advisable  to  follow  its  readings 
as  much  as  possible,  except  in  such  passages  as  were 
evidently  corrupt.  A  second  MS.,  unfortunately  incom- 
plete, from  the  same  collection,  is  of  unknown  date,  since 
the  latter  part  of  the  codex  is  lost ;  from  the  form  of  the 
characters  it  may  be  inferred  that  it  is  not  much  more 
modern  than  the  other  codex  ^  The  difference  between 
both  is  not  very  great ;  yet  there  can  be  no  doubt  that 
the  second  MS.  belongs  to  another  family.  The  varietas 
lection  is  is  strikingly  similar  in  kind  to  what  we  find 
in  the  different  texts  of  the  Va^ra/^-z^/zedika,  edited  by 
Professor  Max  Miiller. 

The  former  manuscript  has  much  in  common  with  the 
London  codices,  from  which  Burnouf  in  the  notes  on  his 
translation  has  derived  numerous  various  readings ;  it 
stands  farther  off  from  the  Paris  MS.  that  has  formed 
the  base  of  Burnouf 's  version,  but  not  so  far  as  the  second 

*  Sam  vat  159  Vaisakhasukle  (illegible  the  Tithi)  Gurudine,  Kamadevasya 
vig-ayara^e  likhitam  iti.  There  seem  to  be  wanting  two  syllables  before 
kama. 

*  The  two  Cambridge  MSS.  are  marked  Add.  1682  and  1683. 


INTRODUCTION.  XXXIX 


Cambridge  MS.,  which  shows  the  greatest  number  of 
pecuh'ar  readings.  The  text  of  chapter  iv  in  Professor 
Foucaux's  edition  of  the  Parabole  de  I'enfant  egare  is 
comparatively  modern  and  bad.  In  general  it  may  be  said 
that  all  the  known  copies  of  the  Saddharma-pu;;^arika  are 
written  with  a  want  of  care  little  in  harmony  with  the  holy 
character  of  the  book. 

Before  closing  this  preface  I  beg  to  offer  my  sincere 
thanks  to  Professors  William  Wright  and  E.  B.  Cowell,  at 
Cambridge,  for  the  generous  way  in  which  they  have 
enabled  me  to  use  the  MSS.  I  wanted  for  my  translation. 
My  thanks  are  due  also  to  the  Council  of  Cambridge 
University  and  Mr.  H.  Bradshaw,  for  their  readily  com- 
plying with  my  wishes.  To  Professor  Max  Muller  I  owe  a 
debt  of  gratitude  for  his  kindly  assisting  me  in  my  task 
in  more  than  one  respect,  a  debt  which  I  am  glad  here 
openly  to  acknowledge. 

H.  Kern. 

Leiden. 


xl  SADDHARMA-PUiV^DARIKA. 


Kumaragiva's  Translation  of  Saddharma-pua^da- 

RIKA  III,  STANZAS   1-2  2,    RENDERED    INTO    FrENCH 

BY  Stanislas  Julien. 

J'ai  entendu  le  son  de  cette  loi 

J'ai  obtenu  ce  que  je  n'avais  pas  encore  eu 

Dans  mon  coeur,  j'en  ai  con9u  une  grande  joie. 

Les  filets  des  doutes  ont  tous  disparu 

Jadis,  j'ai  re9u  les  instructions  du  Buddha 

Je  n'ai  pas  perdu  le  grand  v^hicule. 

Le  son  (la  voix)  du  Buddha  existe  (s'entend)  tres  rarement. — 

Elle  peut  detruire  les  tourments  d'esprit  de  tous  les  mortels. — 

Moi,  j'ai  obtenu  I'^puisement  (la  d^livrance  complete)  de  mes  fautes. 

L'ayant  entendue,  j'ai  et^  delivr^  des  chagrins  et  des  tourments 

d'esprit 
Moi,  lorsque  je  demeure  sur  les  montagnes  (ou  dans)  les  vallees, 
Ou  bien  au  bas  des  arbres  des  forets 
Soit  que  je  sois  assis  ou  que  je  marche 
Constamment,  je  pense  a  cette  chose 
H^las,  je  m'adresse  de  severes  reproches 
Je  dis  :  pourquoi  me  trompd-je  moi-meme  ? 
Nous  autres,  nous  sommes  aussi  les  fils  du  Bouddha 
Nous  sommes  entr^s  ensemble  dans  la  loi  exempts  d'imperfections. 
Nous  ne  pourrons  dans  I'avenir 

Expliquer  cette  loi  sans  supdrieure  (anuttaradharma). 
Les  trente  deux  couleur  d'or  (signes  qui  ont  la  couleur  de  I'or), 
Les  dix  forces,  les  moyens  de  d^livrance, 
Se  trouvent  ensemble  au  sein  de  la  loi  unique 
Et  cependant  je  n'ai  pu  obtenir  ces  choses ; 
Les  quatre  vingt  signes  de  beaute, 
Les  dix  huit  lois  non-communes  (a  tous), 
Les  mdrites  et  les  vertus  de  cette  sorte 
Moi,  je  les  ai  tous  perdus. 
Moi,  lorsque  je  me  promenais  seul 
J'ai  vu  le  Bouddha  au  milieu  de  la  grande  multitude 
Son  nom,  sa  reputation  remplissaient  les  dix  contr(!es 
II  comblait  d'avantages  toutes  les  creatures 


INTRODUCTION.  xli 


Je  pense  en  moi-meme  que  j'ai  perdu  ce  profit 

Moi,  parce  que  je  me  suis  tromp^  moi-meme, 

Constamment,  jour  et  nuit 

Chaque  fois,  je  songe  a  cette  chose 

J'ai  voulu  demander  a  I'honorable  du  siecle 

Louant  et  glorifiant  les  bodhisattvas 

C'est  pourquoi  jour  et  nuit 

J'examine  murement  une  telle  chose 

Exempte  d'imperfections  et  difficile  a  concevoir 

Qui  fait  arriver  la  multitude  a  I'estrade  de  I'lntelligence  (Bodhi- 
maw^/a) 

Moi,  dans  I'origine,  j'^tais  attach^  aux  vues  perverses  (a  I'h^r^sie) 

J'etais  un  maitre  de  Brahmatcharis 

L'honorable  du  siecle  connaissait  mon  coeur 

Me  tira  de  I'hdr^sie  et  me  parla  du  Nirva«a 

Je  me  d^barrassai  completement  des  vues  perverses  (de  I'h^r^sie); 

Dans  la  loi  du  vide,  j'obtins  des  tdmoignages,  des  preuves  (J'obtins 
la  preuve  que  je  comprenais  la  loi  du  vide) 

Alors,  je  me  dis  a  moi-meme 

Que  j'avais  obtenu  d' arriver  au  Nirva«a. 

Mais  maintenant  je  m'aper9ois 

Que  ce  n'est  pas  le  vrai  Nirva«a 

Si,  un  jour,  j'obtiens  de  devenir  Bouddha 

Et  que  je  sois  pourvu  des  trente  deux  signes  de  beaut^ 

Les  Devas,  les  Yakchas 

Les  dragons,  les  esprits  etc. 

M'honoreront  et  me  v^ndreront 

Dans  ce  temps  la,  je  pourrai  dire 

Que  pour  toujours  j'ai  obtenu  le  Nirvawa  complet. 

Le  Bouddha,  dans  la  grande  assemblee 

M'a  dit  que  je  devais  devenir  Bouddha 

Quand  j'eus  entendu  le  son  de  cette  loi 

Mes  doutes,  mes  regrets,  completement  disparurent. 

Au  commencement,  lorsque  j'eus  entendu  ce  que  disait  le  Bouddha, 

Au  fond  de  mon  coeur,  je  fus  remplis  d'^tonnement  et  de  doutes. 

(Je  me  dis)  Le  demon  n'aurait  pas  pris  la  figure  du  Bouddha 

Pour  troubler  mon  coeur  ? 

Le  Bouddha  ayant  employ^  toute  sorte  de  moyens 

De  comparaisons,  de  paroles  et  de  discours  habiles 

Mon  coeur  devint  calme  comme  la  mer. 

Quand  je  I'eus  entendu,  le  filet  de  mes  doutes  se  d^chira 

Le  Bouddha  dit  que  dans  les  siecles  passds 

c  3 


xlii  SADDHARMA-PUA^Z)ARiKA. 


Des  bouddhas  sans  nombre,  qui  ont  obtenu  le  Nirvana 

Reposaient  en  paix  au  milieu  des  moyens  habiles 

Et  que  tous  avaient  expliqud  cette  loi 

Que  des  bouddhas  presents  et  futurs 

Dont  le  nombre  est  infini 

A  I'aide  de  toute  sorte  de  moyens  habiles 

Avaient  explique  et  d6ve\opp6  une  telle  loi 

Maintenant,  Honorable  du  siecle 

Depuis  que  tu  es  nd  et  que  tu  es  sorti  de  la  famille 

Tu  as  obtenu  de  tourner  la  roue  de  la  loi 

Et  de  I'expliquer  par  des  moyens  habiles 

L'Honorable  du  siecle  a  expose  la  vraie  voie. 

Le  Mara  n'a  pas  fait  cette  chose  (n'a  pas  pris  la  figure  du  Bouddha) 

C'est  pourquoi  je  sais  fermement 

Que  le  Mara  ne  s'est  pas  d^guise  en  Bouddha  (litt.  ne  s'est  pas 

fait  Bouddha). 
Moi,  a  cause  du  filet  des  doutes  auxquels  je  m'^tais  abandonn^ 
Je  m'dtais  dit  que  c'dtait  une  chose  faite  par  le  Mara  (c.  a.  d.  que 

le  Mara  avait  pris  la  figure  du  Bouddha) 
Mais  quand  j'eus  entendu  sa  voix  douce  et  souple 
Profonde,  6\oign6e,  extremement  d6\i6e 
Expliquant  la  loi  pure 
Mon  coeur  a  6t6  grandement  rejoui. 
Mes  doutes  ont  pour  toujours  disparu 
Je  reside  en  paix  au  sein  de  la  vraie  science 
Decid^ment,  je  dois  devenir  Bouddha. 
Je  serai  respecte  des  Devas 
Je  tournerai  la  roue  de  la  loi  sans-supdrieure 
J'instruirai  et  je  convertirai  les  Bodhisattvas. 


SADDHARMA-PUiVZ^ARiKA 


OR 


THE  LOTUS  OF  THE  TRUE  LAW. 


HOMAGE    TO 
ALL    THE    BUDDHAS    AND    BODHISATTVAS. 


CHAPTER     L 

INTRODUCTORY. 

Thus  have  I  heard.  Once  upon  a  time  the  Lord 
was  staying  at  Ra^agr/ha,  on  the  Grzdhraku^a^ 
mountain,  with  a  numerous  assemblage  of  monks, 
twelve  hundred  monks,  all  of  them  Arhats,  stainless, 
free  from  depravity,  self-controlled^,  thoroughly  eman- 
cipated in  thought  and  knowledge,  of  noble  breed, 
(like  unto)  great  elephants,  having  done  their  task, 
done  their  duty,  acquitted  their  charge,  reached  the 
goal ;  in  whom  the  ties  which  bound  them  to  existence 
were  wholly  destroyed,  whose  minds  were  thoroughly 
emancipated  by  perfect  knowledge,  who  had  reached 
the  utmost  perfection  in  subduing  all  their  thoughts ; 
who  were  possessed  of  the  transcendent  faculties  "; 

^  I.  e.  Vulture  Peak. 

"^  Vai'ibhuta.    Like  vajin,  it  likewise  means,  'having  subdued 
othefs  or  the  world.' 

^  The  five  Abhi^?<as,  viz.  the  magical  powers,  the  divine  ear, 

.        [21]  B 


2  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  I. 

A 

eminent  disciples,  such  as  the  venerable  A^;^ata- 
Kau7/^inya,  the  venerable  A^va^it,  the  venerable 
Vdshpa,  the  venerable  Mahan^man,  the  venerable 
Bhadrika^  the  venerable  Maha-Ka^yapa,  the  venera- 
ble Ka^yapa  of  Uruvilv^,  the  venerable  Kd^yapa  of 
Nadi,  the  venerable  Kd^yapa  of  Gaya^  the  venera- 
ble K^ariputra,  the  venerable  Maha-Maudgalydyana=^, 
the  venerable  Maha-K^tydyana  ^,  the  venerable  Ani- 
ruddha  ^  the  venerable  Revata,  the  venerable  Kap- 
phi;2a  ^,  the  venerable  Gavimpati,  the  venerable 
Pilindavatsa,  the  venerable  Vakula,  the  venerable 
Bhdradva^a  \  the  venerable  Mahd-Kaush//^ila  ^  the 
venerable  Nanda  (alias  Mahdnanda),  the  venerable 


knowledge  of  the  thoughts  of  others,  knowledge  of  former  exist- 
ences, the  divine  eye.  Sometimes  a  sixth  Abhi^«a  is  added, 
viz.  the  knowledge  which  causes  the  destruction  of  human 
passion;  Burnouf,  Lotus,  p.  820  sqq. ;  Spence  Hardy,  Eastern 
Monachism,  p.  284. 

^  These  are  known  as  the  Five  Bhadravargiyas,  or,  in  Pali,  Pa^li'a- 
vaggiyas ;  they  were  the  first  five  disciples. 

2  The  conversion  of  Ka^yapa  of  Uruvilva  and  the  two  following 
is  told  in  Buddhist  Birth  Stories  (translated  by  Rhys  Davids),  1, 114; 
Mahavagga  (ed.  Oldenberg)  I,  15. 

^  ^'ariputra  and  Maudgalyayana  are  termed  the  foremost  or 
chief  disciples  (agra^ravaka)  of  the  Lord.  About  their  con- 
version, see  Birth  Stories,  I,  118  ;  Mahavagga  I,  23. 

*  About  him,  see  Mahavagga  V,  13. 

^  In  Pali,  Anuruddha  ;  the  story  of  his  conversion  is  told  i^ulla- 
vagga  (ed.  Oldenberg)  I,  8. 

^  The  name  is  variously  spelt  Kapphiwa,  Kasphiwa,  Kashphi^a, 
Kapphilla,  Ka?«philla.  The  Tibetan  form  Kapina  (in  Lotus,  p.  294) 
agrees  with  Maha-Kappina  in  Pali  writings;  Mahavagga II,  5;  X,  5. 
I  cannot  help  guessing  that  the  name  is  identical  with  2(/)iVj;f,  the 
proper  name  of  Kalanos,  in  Plutarch's  Alexander,  chap.  65 ;  one 

would    expect  KuacfiLvrjs. 

'  The  same  with  Pi;;f/ola-Bharadva^a,  iTullavagga  V,  8. 
»  In  Pali  Maha-Ko///nta ;  Mahavagga  X,  5. 


I.  INTRODUCTORY. 


Upananda\  the  venerable  Sundara-Nanda^,  the  vene- 
rable Pur;2a  Maitraya;nputra,  the  venerable  Subhiati, 
the  venerable  Rahula  ;  with  them  yet  other  great  dis- 
ciples, as  the  venerable  Ananda,  still  under  training, 
and  two  thousand  other  monks,  some  of  whom  still 
under  training,  the  others  masters ;  with  six  thousand 
nuns  having  at  their  head  Mahapra^apati^,  and  the 
nun  Yai-odhara,  the  mother  of  Rahula,  along  with  her 
train;  (further)  with  eighty  thousand  Bodhisattvas, 
all  unable  to  slide  back  ^,  endowed  with  the  spells  of 
supreme,  perfect  enlightenment,  firmly  standing  in 
wisdom ;  who  moved  onward  the  never  deviatino-  ^ 
wheel  of  the  law  ;  who  had  propitiated  many  hun- 
dred thousands  of  Buddhas ;  who  under  many 
hundred  thousands  of  Buddhas  had  planted  the  roots 
of  goodness,  had  been  intimate  with  many  hundred 
thousands  of  Buddhas,  were  in  body  and  mind  fully 
penetrated  with  the  feeling  of  charity ;  able  in  com- 
municating the  wisdom  of  the  Tathagatas ;  very 
wise,  having  reached  the  perfection  of  wisdom  ;  re- 
nowned in  many  hundred  thousands  of  worlds ; 
having  saved  many  hundred  thousand  myriads  ^  of 
ko/is  ^  of  beings ;    such    as  the  Bodhisattva  Maha- 

^  Surnamed -Sakyaputra ;  Mahavaggal,  52. 

-  Known  from  Lalita-vistara,  p.  164  ;  Burnouf  has  Sunanda. 

^  Gautami,  the  aunt  of  Gautama  Buddha. 

*  Or,  to  swerve  from  their  course. 
^  Or,  never  rolling  back. 

*  I  have  followed  Burnouf  in  translating  nayuta  by  ten  thousand; 
this  being  the  value  of  the  Sanskrit  term  ayuta.  According  to  the 
Petersburg  Dictionary  the  Northern  Buddhists  attach  to  nayuta  the 
value  of  100,000  millions.  The  Pali  nahuta  is  said  to  be  a  vast 
number,  one  followed  by  twenty-eight  ciphers;  but  in  Spence 
Hardy's  INIanual  of  Buddhism,  p.  193,  its  worth  is  put  down  at  a 
myriad. 

■^  I.  e.  ten  millions. 

B    2 


SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  I. 


sattva^  Man^'usri,  as  prince  royal-;  the  Bodhisattvas 
Mahasattvas  Avalokitejvara,  Mahasthamaprapta,  Sar- 
varthanaman,  Nityodyukta,  Anikshiptadhura,  Ratna- 
■pani,  Bhaisha^ara^a,  Pradanai"ura,  Ratna/^andra, 
Ratnaprabha,  Pur^^a/^andra,  Mahavikramin,  Trailo- 
kavikramin,  Anantavikramin,  Mahapratibhana,  Sata- 
tasamitabhlyukta,  Dhara;^idhara^,  Akshayamati,  Pad- 
ma^ri,  Nakshatrara^a,  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva 
Maitreya,  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Si;;^ha. 

With  them  were  also  the  sixteen  virtuous  men  to 
begin  with  Bhadrapala,  to  wit,  Bhadrapala,  Ratna- 
kara,  Susarthavaha,  Naradatta^,  Guhagupta,  Varu- 
/^adatta,  Indradatta,  Uttaramati,  Vii-eshamati,  Vardha- 
manamati,  Amoghadari^in,  Susa;;^sthita,  Suvikranta- 
vikramin,  Anupamamati,  Suryagarbha,  and  Dhara- 
T^idhara ;  besides  eighty  thousand  Bodhisattvas, 
among  whom  the  fore-mentioned  were  the  chiefs ; 
further  6akra,  the  ruler  of  the  celestials,  with  twenty 
thousand  gods,  his  followers,  such  as  the  god 
iTandra  (the  Moon),  the  god  Surya  (the  Sun), 
the  god  Samantagandha  (the  Wind),  the  god  Rat- 
naprabha, the  god  Avabhasaprabha,  and  others ; 
further,  the  four  great  rulers  of  the  cardinal  points 
with  thirty  thousand  gods  in  their  train,  viz.  the 
great  ruler  Virurt^/aka,  the  great  ruler  Virtapaksha, 
the  great  ruler  Dhmarash/ra,  and  the  great  ruler 
Vai5"rava;^a ;  the  god  l^'vara  and  the  god  Mahe- 
^•vara^  each  followed  by  thirty  thousand  gods;  further, 

^  I.  e.  a  great  being. 
^  Or, '  still  a  youth,'  kumarabhuta. 

^  In  chap.  XXIV  he  occurs  as  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Dhara- 
«indhara. 

*  Burnouf  has  Ratnadatta. 

^  The  distinction  between  Ijvara   and  INIahej-vara,  both   mere 


INTRODUCTORY. 


Brahma  Sahampati  ^  and  his  twelve  thousand  fol- 
lowers, the  Brahmakayika  gods,  amongst  whom 
Brahma  ^'ikhin^  and  Brahma  6^yotishprabha,  with  the 
other  twelve  thousand  Brahmakayika  gods  =^ ;  together 
with  the  eight  Naga  kings  and  many  hundred  thou- 
sand myriads  of  ko/Is  of  Nagas  in  their  train,  viz. 
the  Naga  king  Nanda,  the  Naga  king  Upananda, 
Sagara,  Vasuki,  Takshaka,  Manasvin,  Anavatapta, 
and  Utpalaka ;  further,  the  four  Kinnara  kings  with 
many  hundred  thousand  myriads  of  ko/is  of  fol- 
lowers, viz.  the  Kinnara  king  Druma,  the  Kinnara 
king  Mahadharma,  the  Kinnara  king  Sudharma,  and 
the  Kinnara  king  Dharmadhara ;  besides,  the  four 
divine  beings  (called)  Gandharvakayikas  with  many 
hundred  thousand  Gandharvas  in  their  suite,  viz.  the 
Gandharva  Mano^/^a,  the  Gandharva  Mano^7^asvara, 
the  Gandharva  Madhura,  and  the  Gandharva  Ma- 
dhurasvara ;  further,  the  four  chiefs  of  the  demons 


epithets  of  5iva,  has  its  counterpart  in  the  equally  fanciful  difference 
between  Tishya  and  Pushya,  Meru  and  Sumeru,  which  occurs  in 
Buddhist  writings.  In  Mahavastu,  p.  355  (ed-  Senart),  we  even  find 
Maya  distinguished  from  Mahannaya. 

1  On  comparing  Lalita-vistara,  p.  5i5>  1-  3>  with  the  parallel  pas- 
sage ]\Iahavagga  I,  5,  4,  it  appears  that  Sahampati  and  6'ikhin  are 
synonymous  terms.  As  -Sikhin  is  a  common  term  for  Agni  and  as 
to  the  latter  in  Rig-veda  L  97,  5  ;  127,10;  III,  14,  2,  is  applied  the 
epithet  of  sahasvat,  it  may  be  inferred  that  Sahampati  and  the 
collateral  form  Sahapati  answer  to  a  Sanskrit  sahasampati  or 
sahaspati. 

2  Another  instance  of  a  fanciful  distinction. 

3  It  may  be  remarked  that  in  the  enumeration  of  gods,  between 
^iva  and  Brahma,  Vish;m  is  wanting.  Those  who  adopt  the  view 
that  ^akyamuni  is  an  Avatara  of  Vish«u,  consequently  a  mythical 
being,  will  readily  account  for  that  omission  by  saying  that  Vish;m 
and  the  Lord  Buddha  are  identical,  so  that  Vish/m  is  present  in  the 
gathering,  under  the  disguise  of  Buddha. 


SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA. 


followed  by  many  hundred  thousand  myriads  of 
koz'is  of  demons,  viz,  the  chief  of  the  demons  Bali, 
Kharaskandha  \  Vema/titri  2,  and  Rahu  ;  along  with 
the  four  Garu^T^a  chiefs  followed  by  many  hundred 
thousand  myriads  of  ko/is  of  Garu^as,  viz.  the 
Garu^a  chiefs  Mahate^as,  Mahakaya,  Mahapur;^a, 
and  Maharddhiprapta,  and  with  A^ata.Tatru,  king  of 
Magadha,  the  son  of  Vaidehi. 

Now  at  that  time  it  was  that  the  Lord  surrounded, 
attended,  honoured,  revered,  venerated,  worshipped 
by  the  four  classes  of  hearers,  after  expounding  the 
Dharmaparyaya  ^  called  '  the  Great  Exposition,'  a 
text  of  great  development,  serving  to  instruct  Bodhi- 
sattvas  and  proper  to  all  Buddhas,  sat  cross-legged 
on  the  seat  of  the  law  and  entered  upon  the  medita- 
tion termed  'the  station  of  the  exposition  of  Infinity;' 
his  body  was  motionless  and  his  mind  had  reached 
perfect  tranquillity.  And  as  soon  as  the  Lord  had 
entered  upon  his  meditation,  there  fell  a  great  rain  of 
divine  flowers,  Mandaravas  ^  and  great  Mandaravas, 
Ma;'^^ushakas  and  great  Ma^^^Cishakas"^,  covering  the 
Lord  and  the  four  classes  of  hearers,  while  the 
whole  Buddha  field  shook  in  six  ways  :    it  moved, 

^  Burnouf  has  Suraskandha. 

^  This  is  a  wrong  Sanskritisation  of  a  Prakrit  Vema-^'itti,  Pali 
Vepa>^itti ;  the  proper  Sanskrit  equivalent  is  Vipra/iitti. 

^  I.  e.  turn,  period,  or  roll  of  the  law ;  it  may  often  be  rendered 
by  'a  discourse  on  the  law.'  In  the  sense  of  period,  term,  end,  it  is 
used  as  the  title  of  the  dosing  chapter  of  the  whole  work. 

*  Mandarava,  or  rather  IMandarava,  derived  from  mandaru  = 
mandara,  Erythrina,  is  here  a  heavenly  flower,  or,  as  the  Indians 
say,  'a  cloud-flower,'  meghapushpa,  i.e.  raindrop  and  hail- 
stone. MaTi^usha  is  a  name  of  the  Rubia  Manjista ;  the  word  is 
also  said  to  mean,  *a  stone;'  in  this  case  perhaps  a  hailstone  or 
dewdrop. 


INTRODUCTORY. 


removed,  trembled,  trembled  from  one  end  to  the 
other,  tossed,  tossed  along. 

Then  did  those  who  were  assembled  and  sitting 
together  in  that  congregation,  monks,  nuns,  male  and 
female  lay  devotees,  gods,  Nagas,  goblins,  Gan- 
dharvas,  demons,  GariWas,  Kinnaras,  great  serpents, 
men,  and  beings  not  human,  as  well  as  governors  of 
a  region,  rulers  of  armies  and  rulers  of  four  con- 
tinents, all  of  them  with  their  followers,  gaze  on  the 
Lord  in  astonishment,  in  amazement,  in  ecstasy. 

And  at  that  moment  there  issued  a  ray  from 
within  the  circle  of  hair  between  the  eyebrows  of 
the  Lord^  It  extended  over  eighteen  hundred 
thousand  Buddha-fields  in  the  eastern  quarter,  so 
that  all  those  Buddha-fields  appeared  wholly  illu- 
minated by  its  radiance,  down  to  the  great  hell 
AvU'i  and  up  to  the  limit  of  existence.  And  the 
beings  in  any  of  the  six  states  ^  of  existence  became 
visible,  all  without  exception.  Likewise  the  Lords 
Buddhas  staying,  living,  and  existing  in  those 
Buddha-fields  became  all  visible,  and  the  law 
preached  by  them  could  be  entirely  heard  by  all 
beings.  And  the  monks,  nuns,  lay  devotees  male 
and  female,  Yogins  and  students  of  Yoga,  those 
who  had  obtained  the  fruition  (of  the  Paths  of  sanc- 
tification)  and  those  who  had  not,  they,  too,  became 
visible.    And  the  Bodhisattvas  Mahasattvas  In  those 


^  This  reminds  one  of  Wordsworth's  lines  : 
'Bright  apparition  suddenly  put  forth 
The  Rainbow,  smiling  on  the  faded  storm; 
The  mild  assemblage  of  the  starry  heavens; 
And  the  great  Sun,  earth's  universal  Lord.' 
2  Viz.  hell,  the  brute  creation,  the  world  of  ghosts,  of  demons,  of 
men,  and  of  gods  or  angels. 


8  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARiKA.  I. 

Buddha-fields  who  plied  the  Bodhisattva-course  with 
ability,  due  to  their  earnest  belief  in  numerous  and 
various  lessons  and  the  fundamental  ideas,  they,  too, 
became  all  visible.  Likewise  the  Lords  Buddhas  in 
those  Buddha-fields  who  had  reached  final  Nirva;^a 
became  visible,  all  of  them.  And  the  Stupas  made 
of  jewels  and  containing  the  relics  of  the  extinct 
Buddhas  became  all  visible  in  those  Buddha-fields  \ 

Then  rose  in  the  mind  of  the  Bodhisattva  Maha- 
sattva  Maitreya  this  thought :  O  how  great  a  wonder 
does  the  Tathagata  display!  What  may  be  the 
cause,  what  the  reason  of  the  Lord  producing  so 
great  a  wonder  as  this  ?  And  such  astonishing,  pro- 
digious, inconceivable,  powerful  miracles  now  appear, 
although  the  Lord  is  absorbed  in  meditation !  Why, 
let  me  inquire  about  this  matter;  who  would  be  able 
here  to  explain  it  to  me  ?  He  then  thought :  Here 
is  Ma^'ui'ri,  the  prince  royal,  who  has  plied  his 
office  under  former  6^inas  and  planted  the  ropts  of 
goodness,  while  worshipping  many  Buddhas.  This 
Ma?1^um,  the  prince  royal,  must  have  witnessed 
before  such  signs  of  the  former  Tathagatas,  those 
Arhats,  those  perfectly  enlightened  Buddhas ;  of 
yore  he  must  have  enjoyed  the  grand  conversations 
on  the  law.  Therefore  will  I  inquire  about  this 
matter  with  Ma.uousn,  the  prince  royal. 

And  the  four  classes  of  the  audience,  monks,  nuns, 
male  and  female  lay  devotees,  numerous  gods,  Nagas, 

^  It  is  sufficiently  clear,  I  think,  that  the  Buddha-fields  are  the 
heavens,  and  that  we  have  in  the  text  a  description  of  the  aspect  of 
heaven  when  the  stars  are  twinkling  at  dawn,  shortly  after  or 
before.  A  Stiapa  denotes  the  spot  where  a  luminary,  for  the  time 
being  extinct,  once  stood;  in  more  general  acceptation  it  must 
have  been  synonymous  with  dhishwya;  a  fire-place,  or  with  /Sw^o's. 


INTRODUCTORY. 


goblins,  Gandharvas,  demons,  Garufl'as,  Kinnaras, 
great  serpents,  men,  and  beings  not  human,  on  seeing 
the  magnificence  of  this  great  miracle  of  the  Lord, 
were  struck  with  astonishment,  amazement  and  curio- 
sity, and  thought :  Let  us  inquire  why  this  magnifi- 
cent miracle  has  been  produced  by  the  great  power 
of  the  Lord. 

At  the  same  moment,  at  that  very  instant,  the 
Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Maitreya  knew  in  his  mind 
the  thoughts  arising  in  the  minds  of  the  four  classes 
of  hearers  and  he  spoke  to  Ma7^c^ui"ri,  the  prince 
royal :  What,  O  Ma;7^um,  Is  the  cause,  what  is  the 
reason  of  this  wonderful,  prodigious,  miraculous 
shine  having  been  produced  by  the  Lord  ?  Look,  how 
these  eighteen  thousand  Buddha-fields  appear  varie- 
gated, extremely  beautiful,  directed  by  Tathagatas 
and  superintended  by  Tathagatas. 

Then  it  was  that  Maitreya,  the  Bodhisattva 
Mahasattva,  addressed  MaTi^-usri,  the  prince  royal, 
in  the  followlnsr  stanzas  : 

1.  Why,  Mauo-usri,  does  this  ray  darted  by  the 
guide  of  men  shine  forth  from  between  his  brows  ? 
this  single  ray  issuing  from  the  circle  of  hair  ?  and 
why  this  abundant  rain  of  Mandaravas  ? 

2.  The  gods,  overjoyed,  let  drop  Ma/I^ushakas 
and  sandal  powder,  divine,  fragrant,  and  delicious. 

3.  This  earth  is,  on  every  side,  replete  with  splen- 
dour, and  all  the  four  classes  of  the  assembly  are 
filled  with  delight,  while  the  whole  field  shakes  in 
six  different  ways,  frightfully. 

4.  And  that  ray  in  the  eastern  quarter  illuminates 
the  whole  of  eighteen  thousand  Buddha-fields,  simul- 
taneously, so  that  those  fields  appear  as  gold- 
coloured. 


lO  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  I. 


5.  (The  universe)  as  far  as  the  (hell)  Avi/^i  (and) 
the  extreme  limit  of  existence,  with  all  beings 
of  those  fields  living  in  any  of  the  six  states  of 
existence,  those  who  are  leaving  one  state  ^  to  be 
born  in  another  ; 

6.  Their  various  and  different  actions  in  those 
states  have  become  visible  ;  whether  they  are  in 
a  happy,  unhappy,  low,  eminent,  or  intermediate 
position,  all  that  I  see  from  this  place. 

7.  I  see  also  the  Buddhas,  those  lions  of  kings, 
revealing  and  showing  the  essence  of  the  law,  com- 
forting ^  many  ko^'is  of  creatures  and  emitting  sweet- 
sounding  voices. 

8.  They  let  go  forth,  each  in  his  own  field,  a 
deep,  sublime,  wonderful  voice,  while  proclaiming 
the  Buddha-laws  by  means  of  myriads  of  ko/is  of 
illustrations  and  proofs. 

9.  And  to  the  ignorant  creatures  who  are  op- 
pressed with  toils  and  distressed  in  mind  by  birth 
and  old  age,  they  announce  the  bliss  of  Rest,  saying: 
This  is  the  end  of  trouble,  O  monks. 

10.  And  to  those  who  are  possessed  of  strength 
and  vigour  and  who  have  acquired  merit  by  virtue 
or  earnest  belief  in  the  Buddhas,  they  show  the 
vehicle  of  the  Pratyekabuddhas,  by  observing  this 
rule  of  the  law. 

1 1.  And  the  other  sons  of  the  Sugfata  who,  strivino- 
after  superior   knowledge,   have   constantly  accom- 


^  The  word  for  state,  gati,  also  means  '  the  position,  place,'  e.  g. 
of  a  star. 

^  Prajvasamanan,  van  lect.  prakasamanan;  Burnouf  must 
have  followed  the  latter  reading,  his  translation  having  'instrui- 
sent.' 


INTRODUCTORY.  I I 


plished  their  various  tasks,  them  also  they  admonish 
to  enhghtenment. 

12.  From  this  place,  O  May^crughosha,  I  see  and 
hear  such  things  and  thousands  of  ko/is  of  other 
particulars  besides ;  I  will  only  describe  some  of 
them. 

13.  I  see  in  many  fields  Bodhisattvas  by  many 
thousands  of  ko/is,  like  sands  of  the  Ganges,  who 
are  producing  enlightenment  according  to  the  dif- 
ferent degree  of  their  power. 

14.  There  are  some  who  charitably  bestow  wealth, 
gold,  silver,  gold  money,  pearls,  jewels,  conch  shells, 
stones ^  coral,  male  and  female  slaves,  horses,  and 
sheep  ; 

15.  As  well  as  litters  adorned  with  jewels.  They 
are  spending  gifts  with  glad  hearts,  developing  them- 
selves for  superior  enlightenment,  in  the  hope  of 
gaining  the  vehicle. 

16.  (Thus  they  think)  :  'The  best  and  most  ex- 
cellent vehicle  in  the  whole  of  the  threefold  world 
is  the  Buddha-vehicle  magnified  by  the  Sugatas. 
May  I,  forsooth,  soon  gain  it  after  my  spending  such 
gifts.' 

1 7.  Some  give  carriages  yoked  with  four  horses 
and  furnished  with  benches,  flowers,  banners,  and 
flags ;  others  give  objects  made  of  precious  sub- 
stances. 

18.  Some,  again,  give  their  children  and  wives; 

^  The  text  has  jahkha^ila;  according  to  the  Tibetan  version 
this  would  mean  crystal,  but  that  is  impossible  because  ^ahkha  is 
well  known  to  be  a  conch  shell.  Burnouf  hesitatingly  renders  it 
by  'des  conques,  du  cristal;'  see,  however,  Lotus,  p.  314.  I  have 
been  unable  to  find  out  what  meaning  the  compound,  be  it  a 
Dvandva  or  a  Tatpurusha,  is  intended  to  convey. 


12  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  I. 

Others  their  own  flesh ;  (or)  offer,  when  bidden, 
their  hands  and  feet,  striving  to  gain  supreme  en- 
lightenment. 

19.  Some  give  their  heads,  others  their  eyes, 
others  their  dear  own  body,  and  after  cheerfully 
bestowing  their  gifts  they  aspire  to  the  knowledge 
of  the  Tathagatas. 

20.  Here  and  there,  O  Ma^ui-ri,  I  behold  beings 
who  have  abandoned  their  flourishing  kingdoms, 
harems,  and  continents,  left  all  their  counsellors  and 
kinsmen, 

21.  And  betaken  themselves  to  the  guides  of  the 
world  to  ask  for  the  most  excellent  law,  for  the  sake 
of  bliss  ;  they  put  on  reddish-yellow  robes,  and  shave 
hair  and  beard. 

22.  I  see  also  many  Bodhisattvas  like  monks, 
living  in  the  forest,  and  others  inhabiting  the  empty 
wilderness,  enorao-ed  in  recitino^  and  reading. 

23.  And  some  Bodhisattvas  I  see,  who,  full  of 
wisdom^  (or  constancy),  betake  themselves  to  moun- 
tain caves,  where  by  cultivating  and  meditating  the 
Buddha-knowledge  they  arrive  at  its  perception. 

24.  Others  who  have  renounced  all  sensual  de- 
sires, by  purifying  their  own  self,  have  cleared  their 
sphere  and  obtained  the  five  transcendent  faculties, 
live  in  the  wilderness,  as  (true)  sons  of  the  Sugata. 

25.  Some  are  standing  firm,  the  feet  put  together 
and  the  hands  joined  in  token  of  respect  towards  the 
leaders,  and  are  praising  joyfully  the  king  of  the 
leading  (7inas  in  thousands  of  stanzas. 

26.  Some  thoughtful,  meek,  and  tranquil,  who 
have  mastered  the  niceties  of  the  course  of  duty, 
question  the  highest  of  men  about  the  law,  and 
retain  in  their  memory  what  they  have  learnt. 


I.  INTRODUCTORY.  1 3 

27.  And  I  see  here  and  there  some  sons  of  the 
principal  G'ma.  who,  after  completely  developing 
their  own  self,  are  preaching  the  law  to  many  ko/is 
of  living  beings  with  many  myriads  of  illustrations 
and  reasons. 

28.  Joyfully  they  proclaim  the  law,  rousing  many 
Bodhisattvas ;  after  conquering  the  Evil  One  with 
his  hosts  and  vehicles,  they  strike  the  drum  of 
the  law. 

29.  I  see  some  sons  of  the  Sugata,  humble,  calm, 
and  quiet  in  conduct,  living  under  the  command  of 
the  Sugatas,  and  honoured  by  men,  gods,  goblins, 
and  Titans. 

30.  Others,  again,  who  have  retired  to  woody 
thickets,  are  saving  the  creatures  in  the  hells  by 
emitting  radiance  from  their  body,  and  rouse  them 
to  enlightenment. 

31.  There  are  some  sons  of  the  6^ina  who  dwell 
in  the  forest,  abiding  in  vigour,  completely  re- 
nouncing sloth,  and  actively  engaged  in  walking ;  it 
is  by  energy  that  they  are  striving  for  supreme 
enlightenment. 

32.  Others  complete  their  course  by  keeping  a 
constant  purity  and  an  unbroken  morality  like  pre- 
cious stones  and  jewels  ;  by  morality  do  these  strive 
for  supreme  enlightenment. 

33.  Some  sons  of  the  6^ina,  whose  strength  con- 
sists in  forbearance,  patiently  endure  abuse,  censure, 
and  threats  from  proud  monks.  They  try  to  attain 
enlightenment  by  dint  of  forbearance. 

34.  Further,  I  see  Bodhisattvas,  who  have  for- 
saken all  wanton  pleasures,  shun  unwise  companions 
and  delight  in  having  intercourse  with  genteel  men 
(aryas); 


14  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARiKA.  I. 

35.  Who,  with  avoidance  of  any  distraction  of 
thoughts  and  with  attentive  mind,  during  thousands 
of  ko/is  of  years  have  meditated  in  the  caves  of  the 
wilderness ;  these  strive  for  enHghtenment  by  dint 
of  meditation. 

36.  Some,  again,  offer  in  presence  of  the  6^inas 
and  the  assemblage  of  disciples  gifts  (consisting)  in 
food  hard  and  soft,  meat  and  drink,  medicaments 
for  the  sick,  in  plenty  and  abundance. 

2,J.  Others  offer  in  presence  of  the  6^inas  and  the 
assemblage  of  disciples  hundreds  of  ko^is  of  clothes, 
worth  thousands  of  ko/is,  arid  garments  of  priceless 
value. 

38.  They  bestow  in  presence  of  the  Sugatas  hun- 
dreds of  ko/'is  of  monasteries  which  they  have  caused 
to  be  built  of  precious  substances  and  sandal-wood, 
and  which  are  furnished  with  numerous  lodgings 
(or  couches). 

39.  Some  present  the  leaders  of  men  and  their 
disciples  with  neat  and  lovely  gardens  abounding 
with  fruits  and  beautiful  flowers,  to  serve  as  places 
of  daily  recreation. 

40.  When  they  have,  with  joyful  feelings,  made 
such  various  and  splendid  donations,  they  rouse 
their  energy  in  order  to  obtain  enlightenment ;  these 
are  those  who  try  to  reach  supreme  enlightenment 
by  means  of  charitableness. 

41.  Others  set  forth  the  law  of  quietness,  by  many 
myriads  of  illustrations  and  proofs ;  they  preach  it 
to  thousands  of  ko/is  of  living  beings ;  these  are 
tending  to  supreme  enlightenment  by  science. 

42.  (There  are)  sons  of  the  Sugata  who  try  to 
reach  enlightenment  by  wisdom  ;  they  understand 
the   law   of  indifference    and    avoid  acting   at    the 


I.  .  INTRODUCTORY.  1 5 

antinomy  (of  things),  unattached  Hke  birds  in  the 
sky. 

43.  Further,  I  see,  O  Ma;1fughosha,  many  Bodhi- 
sattvas  who  have  displayed  steadiness  under  the 
rule  of  the  departed  Sugatas,  and  now  are  wor- 
shipping the  relics  of  the  6^inas. 

44.  I  see  thousands  of  ko^is  of  Stupas,  numerous 
as  the  sand  of  the  Ganges,  which  have  been  raised 
by  these  sons  of  the  Gina.  and  now  adorn  ko/is  of 
grounds. 

45.  Those  magnificent  Stupas,  made  of  seven 
precious  substances,  with  their  thousands  of  ko^'is  of 
umbrellas  and  banners,  measure  in  height  no  less 
than  5000  yo^anas  and  2000  in  circumference \ 

46.  They  are  always  decorated  with  flags ;  a  mul- 
titude of  bells  is  constantly  heard  sounding;  men, 
gods,  goblins,  and  Titans  pay  their  worship  with 
flowers,  perfumes,  and  music. 

47.  Such  honour  do  the  sons  of  the  Sugata  render 
to  the  relics  of  the  6^inas,  so  that  all  directions  of 
space  are  brightened  as  by  the  celestial  coral  trees 
in  full  blossom. 

48.  From  this  spot  I  behold  all  this ;  those  nu- 
merous ko/is  of  creatures ;  both  this  world  and 
heaven  covered  with  flowers,  owing  to  the  single 
ray  shot  forth  by  the  G'ma.. 

49.  O  how  powerful  is  the  Leader  of  men !  how 
extensive  and  bright  is  his  knowledge !  that  a  single 
beam  darted  by  him  over  the  world  renders  visible 
so  many  thousands  of  fields  ! 

50.  We  are  astonished  at  seeing  this  sign  and 

^  It  is  evident  that  there  is  no  question  of  earthly  Stupas,  nor  of 
hyperbolic  phrases. 


1 6  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARiKA.  I. 


this  wonder,  so  great,  so  incomprehensible.  Ex- 
plain me  the  matter,  O  Ma/'Z^usvara !  the  sons  of 
Buddha  are  anxious  to  know  it. 

51.  The  four  classes  of  the  congregation  in  joyful 
expectation  gaze  on  thee,  O  hero,  and  on  me ; 
gladden  (their  hearts) ;  remove  their  doubts ;  grant 
a  revelation,  O  son  of  Sugata  ! 

52.  Why  is  it  that  the  Sugata  has  now  emitted 
such  a  light  ?  O  how  great  is  the  power  of  the 
Leader  of  men !  O  how  extensive  and  holy  is  his 
knowledge ! 

53.  That  one  ray  extending  from  him  all  over 
the  world  makes  visible  many  thousands  of  fields. 
It  must  be  for  some  purpose  that  this  great  ray  has 
been  emitted. 

54.  Is  the  Lord  of  men  to  show  the  primordial 
laws  which  he,  the  Highest  of  men,  discovered  on  the 
terrace  of  enlightenment  ?  Or  is  he  to  prophesy 
the  Bodhisattvas  their  future  destiny  ? 

55.  There  must  be  a  weighty  reason  why  so 
many  thousands  of  fields  have  been  rendered  visible, 
variegated,  splendid,  and  shining  with  gems,  while 
Buddhas  of  infinite  sight  are  appearing. 

56.  Maitreya  asks  the  son  of  6^ina ;  men,  gods, 
goblins,  and  Titans,  the  four  classes  of  the  congrega- 
tion, are  eagerly  awaiting  what  answer  ]Ma%'usvara 
shall  give  in  explanation. 

Whereupon  Msiuo-usn,  the  prince  royal,  addressed 
Maitreya,  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva,  and  the  whole 
assembly  of  Bodhisattvas  (in  these  words):  It  is  the 
intention  of  the  Tathagata,  young  men  of  good 
family,  to  begin  a  grand  discourse  for  the  teaching 
of  the  law,  to  pour  the  great  rain  of  the  law,  to  make 
resound  the  great  drum  of  the  law,  to  raise  the  great 


I.  INTRODUCTORY.  1 7 

banner  of  the  law,  to  kindle  the  great  torch  of  the  law, 
to  blow  the  great  conch  trumpet  of  the  law,  and  to 
strike  the  great  tymbal  of  the  law.  Again,  it  is  the 
intention  of  the  Tathagata,  young  men  of  good  family, 
to  make  a  grand  exposition  of  the  law  this  very  day. 
Thus  it  appears  to  me,  young  men  of  good  family, 
as  I  have  witnessed  a  similar  sign  of  the  former 
Tathagatas\  the  Arhats,  the  perfectly  enlightened. 
Those  former  Tathagatas,  &c.,  they,  too,  emitted  a 
lustrous  ray,  and  I  am  convinced  that  the  Tathagata 
is  about  to  deliver  a  grand  discourse  for  the  teaching 
of  the  law  and  make  his  grand  speech  on  the  law 
everywhere  heard,  he  having  shown  such  a  fore- 
token. And  because  the  Tathagata,  &c.,  wishes 
that  this  Dharmaparyaya  meeting  opposition  in  all 
the  world 2  be  heard  everywhere,  therefore  does  he 
display  so  great  a  miracle  and  this  fore-token  con- 
sisting in  the  lustre  occasioned  by  the  emission  of 
a  ray. 


^  Hence  it  follows  that  Maft^uiri  is  eternally  young,  like  the  rising 
sun,  like  Mithra,  and  like  the  Arhatawz  deva,  the  latest,  or  youngest, 
of  the  Arhats  or  dnas. 

^  The  rendering  of  vipratyanika,  van  lect.  vipratyaniyaka,  is 
doubtful.  Burnouf,  who  translates  it  by  '  avec  laquelle  (le  monde 
entier)  doit  etre  en  desaccord,' remarks  in  his  comment  (Lotus,  p.  323) 
that  the  Tibetan  version  assigns  to  pratyaniyaka  the  meaning  of 
*  accordance,  concord.'  It  is,  however,  extremely  doubtful  whether 
such  a  word  as  pratyaniyaka  exists  at  all,  and  if  pratyanika 
should  really  be  used  in  the  sense  of  '  concord,'  notwithstanding  its 
generally  occurring  in  the  sense  of  '  opposition,'  we  must  suppose 
that  from  the  notion  of  '  an  opposite  party '  has  developed  that  of  a 
party,  paksha,  in  general.  On  that  assumption  we  can  account 
for  vipratyanika  being  used  in  the  sense  of  vipaksh a,  repugnant, 
contrary,  belonging  to  a  different  party.  As  to  vipratyaniyaka, 
alsoLaUta-vistara,p.  513,  this  may  be  a  wrongly  Sanskritised  vippa/^- 
i^'aniyaka,  to  which  would  answer  a  Sanskrit  vipratyanikaka. 

[2:]  C 


1 8  SADDHARMA-PUiV^DARlKA.  I. 

I  remember,  young  men  of  good  family,  that  in 
the  days  of  yore,  many  immeasurable,  inconceivable, 
immense,  infinite,  countless  JEons,  more  than  count- 
less ^ons  ago,  nay,  long  and  very  long  before, 
there  was  born  a  Tathagata  called  A'andrastarya- 
pradipa^  an  Arhat,  &c.,  endowed  with  science  and 
conduct^,  a  Sugata,  knower  of  the  world,  an  incom- 
parable tamer  of  men,  a  teacher  (and  ruler)  of  gods 
and  men,  a  Buddha  and  Lord.  He  showed  the  law ; 
he  revealed  the  duteous  course  which  is  holy  at  its 
commencement,  holy  in  its  middle,  holy  at  the  end, 
good  in  substance  and  form,  complete  and  perfect, 
correct  and  pure.  That  is  to  say,  to  the  disciples 
he  preached  the  law  containing  the  four  Noble 
Truths,  and  starting  from  the  chain  of  causes  and 
effects,  tending  to  overcome  birth,  decrepitude,  sick- 
ness, death,  sorrow,  lamentation,  woe,  grief,  despond- 
ency, and  finally  leading  to  Nirva;za ;  and  to  the 
Bodhisattvas  he  preached  the  law  connected  with 
the  six  Perfections^,  and  terminating  in  the  know- 
ledge of  the  Omniscient,  after  the  attainment  of 
supreme,  perfect  enlightenment. 

[Now,  young  men  of  good  family,  long  before  the 
time  of  that  Tathagata  A'andrasuryapradipa,  the 
Arhat,  &c.,  there  had  appeared  a  Tathagata,  &c., 
likewise  called  A^andrasuryapradipa,  after  whom, 
O  A^^ita^,  there  were  twenty  thousand  Tathagatas, 


'  I.  e.  having  the  shine  of  moon  and  sun. 

^  Otherwise,  with  light  and  motion. 

•'  Tlie  six  Paramitas,  viz.  of  almsgiving,  morality,  patience,  zeal 
or  energy,  meditation,  and  wisdorii. 

*  I.e.  invincible,  invictus.  The  palpable  connection  between 
INIaitreya  A^nta  and  Mithras  Invictus  is  no  proof  of  the  Buddhists 
having  borrowed  the   figure  from  the  Persians ;  the  coincidence 


I.  INTRODUCTORY.  1 9 

&c.,  all  of  them  bearing  the  name  of  A'andrasurya- 
pradipa,  of  the  same  lineage  and  family  name,  to 
wit,  of  Bharadva^a^  All  those  twenty  thousand 
Tathagatas,  O  A^ita,  from  the  first  to  the  last, 
showed  the  law,  revealed  the  course  which  is  holy 
at  its  commencement,  holy  in  its  middle,  holy  at  the 
end,  &c.  &C.2] 

The  aforesaid  Lord  A'andrasuryapradipa,  the 
Tathagata,  &c.,  when  a  young  prince  and  not  yet 
having-  left  home  (to  embrace  the  ascetic  life),  had 
eight  sons,  viz.  the  young  princes  Sumati,  Ananta- 
mati,  Ratnamati,  Vi^-eshamati,  Vimatisamudghatin, 
Ghoshamati,  and  Dharmamati.  These  eight  young 
princes,  A^ita,  sons  to  the  Lord  ^andrasuryapradipa, 
the  Tathagata,  had  an  immense  fortuned  Each  of 
them  was  in  possession  of  four  great  continents, 
where  they  exercised  the  kingly  sway.  When  they 
saw  that  the  Lord  had  left  his  home  to  become  an 
ascetic,  and  heard  that  he  had  attained  supreme, 
perfect  enlightenment,  they  forsook  all  of  them  the 
pleasures  of  royalty  and  followed  the  example  of  the 
Lord  by  resigning  the  world ;  all  of  them  strove  to 


being  perfectly  explainable  if  we  consider  the  narrow  relationship 
of  Indian  and  Iranian  mythology.  Maitreya  is  not  strictly  identical 
with  Mitra,  but  a  younger  edition,  so  to  speak,  of  him ;  he  is  the 
future  saviour. 

^  It  is  clear  that  Bharadva^a,  a  well-known  progenitor  of  one 
of  the  Brahmanic  families,  existed  long  before  the  creation,  i.e.  of 
the  last  creation  of  the  world.  There  can  be  no  question  of  his 
being  a  man,  at  least  in  the  system  of  the  Lotus. 

^  The  words  in  brackets  are  wanting  in  one  of  the  MSS. 

^  7??'ddhi  is  the  word  used  in  the  text.  As  an  ecclesiastical 
term  it  denotes  '  magic  power,'  but  that  artificial  meaning  does  not 
suit  here. 

C  2 


20  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARlKA.  L 


reach  superior  enlightenment  and  became  preachers 
of  the  law.  While  constantly  leading  a  holy  life, 
those  young  princes  planted  roots  of  goodness  under 
many  thousands  of  Buddhas. 

It  was  at  that  time,  A^ita,  that  the  Lord  Alandra- 
suryapradipa,  the  Tathagata,  &c,,  after  expounding 
the  Dharmaparyaya  called  '  the  Great  Exposition,' 
a  text  of  great  extension,  serving  to  instruct  Bodhi- 
sattvas  and  proper  to  all  Buddhas,  at  the  same 
moment  and  instant,  at  the  same  gathering  of  the 
classes  of  hearers,  sat  cross-legged  on  the  same  seat 
of  the  law,  and  entered  upon  the  meditation  termed 
'the  Station  of  the  exposition  of  Infinity;'  his  body 
was  motionless,  and  his  mind  had  reached  perfect 
tranquillity.  And  as  soon  as  the  Lord  had  entered 
upon  meditation,  there  fell  a  great  rain  of  divine 
flowers,  Mandaravas  and  great  Mandaravas,  Man- 
^ushakas  and  great  Ma;/^ushakas,  covering  the  Lord 
and  the  four  classes  of  hearers,  while  the  whole 
Buddha-field  shook  in  six  ways  ;  it  moved,  removed, 
trembled,  trembled  from  one  end  to  the  other,  tossed, 
tossed  along. 

Then  did  those  who  were  assembled  and  sitting 
together  at  that  congregation,  monks,  nuns,  male 
and  female  lay  devotees,  gods,  Nagas,  goblins, 
Gandharvas,  demons,  Garu^as,  Kinnaras,  great 
serpents,  men  and  beings  not  human,  as  well  as 
governors  of  a  region,  rulers  of  armies  and  rulers 
of  four  continents,  all  of  them  with  their  followers 
gaze  on  the  Lord  in  astonishment,  in  amazement,  in 
ecstasy. 

And  at  that  moment  there  issued  a  ray  from 
within  the  circle  of  hair  between  the  eyebrows  of 
the    Lord.      It   extended    over    eighteen    hundred 


I.  INTRODUCTORY.  2 1 

thousand  Buddha-fields  in  the  eastern  quarter,  so 
that  all  those  Buddha-fields  appeared  wholly  illu- 
minated by  its  radiance,  just  like  the  Buddha-fields 
do  now,  O  A^ita. 

[At  that  juncture,  A^ita,  there  were  twenty  ko/is 
of  Bodhisattvas  following  the  Lord.  All  hearers 
of  the  law  in  that  assembly,  on  seeing  how  the 
world  was  illuminated  by  the  lustre  of  that  ray, 
felt  astonishment,  amazement,  ecstasy,  and  curio- 
sity \] 

Now  it  happened,  A^ita,  that  under  the  rule  of 
the  aforesaid  Lord  there  was  a  Bodhisattva  called 
Varaprabha,  who  had  eight  hundred  pupils.  It  was  to 
this  Bodhisattva  Varaprabha  that  the  Lord,  on  rising 
from  his  meditation,  revealed  the  Dharmaparyaya 
called  'the  Lotus  of  the  True  Law.'  He  spoke  during 
fully  sixty  intermediate  kalpas,  always  sitting  on  the 
same  seat,  with  immovable  body  and  tranquil  mind. 
And  the  whole  assembly  continued  sitting  on  the 
same  seats,  listening  to  the  preaching  of  the  Lord 
for  sixty  intermediate  kalpas,  there  being  not  a 
single  creature  in  that  assembly  who  felt  fatigue 
of  body  or  mind. 

As  the  Lord  A'andrasuryapradipa,  the  Tathagata, 
&c.,  during  sixty  intermediate  kalpas  had  been  ex- 
pounding the  Dharmaparyaya  called  '  the  Lotus  of 
the  True  Law,'  a  text  of  great  development,  serving 
to  instruct  Bodhisattvas  and  proper  to  all  Buddhas, 
he  instantly  announced  his  complete  Nirva;2a  to  the 
world,  including  the  gods,  Maras  and  Brahmas,  to  all 
creatures,  including  ascetics,  Brahmans,  ^ods,  men 
and  demons,  saying :   To-day,  O  monks,   this  very 

^  The  passage  in  brackets  is  wanting  in  one  of  the  MSS. 


22  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  I. 

night,  in  the  middle  watch,  will  the  Tathagata,  by 
entering  the  element  of  absolute  Nirva;/a,  become 
wholly  extinct. 

Thereupon,  A^ita,  the  Lord  A'andrasuryapradipa, 
the  Tathagata,  &c.,  predestinated  the  Bodhlsattva 
called  ^Srigarbha  to  supreme,  perfect  enlightenment, 
and  then  spoke  thus  to  the  whole  assembly : 
O  monks,  this  Bodhisattva  6'ngarbha  here  shall 
immediately  after  me  attain  supreme,  perfect  en- 
lightenment, and  become  Vimalanetra,  the  Tatha- 
gata, &c. 

Thereafter,  A^ita,  that  very  night,  at  that  very 
watch,  the  Lord  A'andrasuryapradipa,  the  Tathagata, 
&c.,  became  extinct  by  entering  the  element  of  abso- 
lute Nirva;2a.  And  the  afore-mentioned  Dharmapar- 
yaya,  termed  '  the  Lotus  of  the  True  Law,'  was  kept 
in  memory  by  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Vara- 
prabha ;  during  eighty  intermediate  kalpas  did  the 
Bodhisattva  Varaprabha  keep  and  reveal  the  com- 
mandment of  the  Lord  who  had  entered  Nirva;2a. 
Now  it  so  happened,  A^ita,  that  the  eight  sons  of 
the  Lord  TTandrasuryapradipa,  Mati  and  the  rest, 
were  pupils  to  that  very  Bodhisattva  Varaprabha. 
They  were  by  him  made  ripe  for  supreme,  perfect 
enlightenment,  and  in  after  times  they  saw  and  wor- 
shipped many  hundred  thousand  myriads  of  ko/is  of 
Buddhas,  all  of  whom  had  attained  supreme,  perfect 
enlightenment,  the  last  of  them  being  Dipahkara, 
the  Tathagata,  &c. 

Amongst  those  eight  pupils  there  was  one  Bodhi- 
sattva w\\o  attached  an  extreme  value  to  gain, 
honour  and  praise,  and  was  fond  of  glory,  but  all 
the  words  and  letters  one  taught  him  faded  (from 
his  memory),  did  not  stick.     So  he  got  the  appella- 


I.  INTRODUCTORY.  23 

tion  of  Ya5"askama^  He  had  propitiated  many 
hundred  thousand  myriads  of  ko^is  of  Buddhas  by 
that  root  of  goodness,  and  afterwards  esteemed, 
honoured,  respected,  revered,  venerated,  worshipped 
them.  Perhaps,  A^ita,  thou  feelest  some  doubt, 
perplexity  or  misgiving  that  in  those  days,  at  that 
time,  there  was  another  Bodhisvattva  Mahasattva 
Varaprabha,  preacher  of  the  law.  But  do  not  think 
so.  Why  ?  because  it  is  myself  who  in  those  days, 
at  that  time,  was  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Vara- 
prabha, preacher  of  the  law  ;  and  that  Bodhisattva 
named  Ya^-askama,  the  lazy  one,  it  is  thyself,  A^ita, 
who  in  those  days,  at  that  time,  wert  the  Bodhisattva 
named  Yai"askama,  the  lazy  one. 

And  so,  A^ita,  having  once  seen  a  similar  fore- 
token of  the  Lord,  I  infer  from  a  similar  ray  being 
emitted  just  now,  that  the  Lord  is  about  to  expound 
the  Dharmaparyaya  called  '  the  Lotus  of  the  True 
Law.' 

And  on  that  occasion,  in  order  to  treat  the  subject 
more  copiously,  Ma/z^um,  the  prince  royal,  uttered 
the  followinor  stanzas : 

57.  I  remember  a  past  period,  inconceivable, 
illimited  kalpas  ago,  when  the  highest  of  beings, 
the  (9ina  of  the  name  of  A'anclrasuryapradipa,  was 
in  existence. 

58.  He  preached  the  true  law,  he,  the  leader  of 
creatures ;  he  educated  an  infinite  number  of  ko/is 
of  beings,  and  roused  inconceivably  many  Bodhi- 
sattvas  to  acquiring  supreme  Buddha-knowledge. 

59.  And  the  eight  sons  born  to  him,  the  leader, 
when  he  was  prince  royal,  no  sooner  saw  that  the 

^  I.  e.  desirous  of  glory. 


24  SADDHARMA-PUJVZ^ARIKA.  I. 

great  sage    had    embraced    ascetic    life,   than    they 
resigned  worldly  pleasures  and  became  monks. 

60.  And  the  Lord  of  the  world  proclaimed  the  law, 
and  revealed  to  thousands  of  ko/is  of  livingf  beines 
the  Sutra,  the  development,  which  by  name  is  called 
'  the  excellent  Exposition  of  Infinity.' 

61.  Immediately  after  delivering  his  speech,  the 
leader  crossed  his  legs  and  entered  upon  the  medi- 
tation of  '  the  excellent  Exposition  of  the  Infinite.' 
There  on  his  seat  of  the  law  the  eminent  seer 
continued  absorbed  in  meditation. 

62.  And  there  fell  a  celestial  rain  of  Mandaravas, 
while  the  drums  (of  heaven)  resounded  without 
being  struck ;  the  gods  and  elves  in  the  sky  paid 
honour  to  the  highest  of  men. 

62,.  And  simultaneously  all  the  fields  (of  Buddha) 
began  trembling.  A  wonder  it  was,  a  great  prodigy. 
Then  the  chief  emitted  from  between  his  brows  one 
extremely  beautiful  ray, 

64.  Which  moving  to  the  eastern  quarter  glittered, 
illuminating  the  world  all  over  the  extent  of  eighteen 
thousand  fields.  It  manifested  the  vanishinsf  and 
appearing  of  beings. 

65.  Some  of  the  fields  then  seemed  jewelled, 
others  showed  the  hue  of  lapis  lazuli,  all  splendid, 
extremely  beautiful,  owing  to  the  radiance  of  the 
ray  from  the  leader. 

66.  Gods  and  men,  as  well  as  Nao^as,  groblins, 
Gandharvas,  nymphs,  Kinnaras,  and  those  occupied 
with  serving  the  Sugata  became  visible  in  the 
spheres  and  paid  their  devotion. 

67.  The  Buddhas  also,  those  self-born  beings, 
appeared  of  their  own  accord,  resembling  golden 
columns ;    like    unto   a   golden    disk    (widiin    lapis 


INTRODUCTORY.  25 


lazuli),  they   revealed  the  law  in   the   midst  of  the 
assembly. 

68.  The  disciples,  indeed,  are  not  to  be  counted : 
the  disciples  of  Sugata  are  numberless.  Yet  the 
lustre  of  the  ray  renders  them  all  visible  in  every 
field. 

69.  Energetic,  without  breach  or  flaw  in  their 
course,  similar  to  gems  and  jewels,  the  sons  of  the 
leaders  of  men  are  visible  in  the  mountain  caves 
where  they  are  dwelling. 

70.  Numerous  Bodhisattvas,  like  the  sand  of  the 
Ganges,  who  are  spending  all  their  wealth  in  giving 
alms,  who  have  the  strength  of  patience,  are 
devoted  to  contemplation  and  wise,  become  all  of 
them  visible  by  that  ray. 

71.  Immovable,  unshaken,  firm  in  patience,  de- 
voted to  contemplation,  and  absorbed  in  meditation 
are  seen  the  true  sons  of  the  Sugatas  while  they 
are  striving  for  supreme  enlightenment  by  dint  of 
meditation. 

72.  They  preach  the  law  in  many  spheres,  and 
point  to  the  true,  quiet,  spotless  state  they  know. 
Such  is  the  effect  produced  by  the  power  of  the 
Sugata. 

^2)'  And  all  the  four  classes  of  hearers  on 
seeing    the    power     of    the     mighty^     A'andrarka- 

^  The  text  has  tayin,  a  word  frequently  occurring  in  the  Lotus. 
I  assume  that  the  form  tapin,  given  in  the  dictionaries  as  an  epithet 
of  Buddha,  is  but  a  misread  tayin,  and  further  that  this  is  radically 
the  same  with  the  Pali  tadi  (tadin).  As  tayana,  Pacini  I,  3,  38,  is 
explained  to  have  the  meaning  of  thriving,  prospering,  it  may  be  sup- 
posed that  tayin  on  the  strength  of  its  derivation  denotes  thriving, 
prosperous,  mighty,  holy,  as  well  as  making  prosperous,  blessing, 
sanctifying.  Burnouf  derives  it  from  a  supposed  Sanskrit  tray  in, 
and  translates  it  by  'protector.'    It  is,  indeed,  by  no  means  unlikely 


26  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA. 


dipa  ^  were  filled  with  joy  and  asked  one  another : 
How  Is  this  ? 

74.  And  soon  afterwards,  as  the  Leader  of  the 
world,  worshipped  by  men,  gods,  and  goblins,  rose 
from  his  meditation,  he  addressed  his  son  Vara- 
prabha,  the  wise  Bodhisattva  and  preacher  of  the 
law  : 

75.  '  Thou  art  wise,  the  eye  and  refuge  of  the 
world ;  thou  art  the  trustworthy  keeper  of  my  law, 
and  canst  bear  witness  as  to  the  treasure  of  laws 
which  I  am  to  lay  bare  to  the  weal  of  living  beings.' 

76.  Then,  after  rousing  and  stimulating,  praising 
and  lauding  many  Bodhisattvas,  did  the  6^ina  pro- 
claim the  supreme  laws  during  fully  sixty  inter- 
mediate kalpas. 

^'].  And  whatever  excellent  supreme  law  was 
proclaimed  by  the  Lord  of  the  world  while  conti- 
nuing sitting  on  the  very  same  seat,  was  kept  in 
memory  by  Varaprabha,  the  son  of  6^ina,  the  preacher 
of  the  law. 

']'^.  And  after  the  6"ina  and  Leader  had  mani- 
fested the  supreme  law  and  stimulated  the  numerous 
crowd,  he  spoke,  that  day,  towards  the  world  includ- 
ing the  gods  (as  follows) : 

79.  '  I  have  manifested  the  rule  of  the  law ;  I 
have  shown  the  nature  of  the  law ;  now,  O  monks, 
it  is  the  time  of  my  Nirva;^a;  this  very  night,  in  the 
middle  watch. 

80.  '  Be  zealous  and  strong  in  persuasion ;  apply 
yourselves  to  my  lessons ;  (for)  the  6^inas,  the  great 


that  tayin  was  used  synonymously  with  natha  or  nayaka,  but 
it  seems  not  necessary  to  derive  it  from  trayate. 

^  This  name  is  synonymous  with  ^andrasuryapradipa ;  one  of 
the  MSS.  has  ^andrapradipa. 


I.  INTRODUCTORY.  27 

seers,  are  but  rarely  met  with  in  the  lapse  of  myriads 
of  ko/is  of  ^ons.' 

81.  The  many  sons  of  Buddha  were  struck  with 
grief  and  filled  with  extreme  sorrow  when  they 
heard  the  voice  of  the  highest  of  men  announcing 
that  his  Nirva;^a  was  near  at  hand. 

82.  To  comfort  so  inconceivably  many  ko/is  of 
living  beings  the  king  of  kings  said :  '  Be  not 
afraid,  O  monks ;  after  my  Nirv^;/a  there  shall  be 
another  Buddha. 

83.  '  The  wise  Bodhisattva  .5'rigarbha,  after  finish- 
ing his  course  in  faultless  knowledge,  shall  reach 
highest,  supreme  enlightenment,  and  become  a  6^ina 
under  the  name  of  Vimalagranetra.' 

84.  That  very  night,  in  the  middle  watch,  he  met 
complete  extinction,  like  a  lamp  when  the  cause 
(of  its  burning)  is  exhausted.  His  relics  were 
distributed,  and  of  his  Stupas  there  was  an  infinite 
number  of  myriads  of  ko/'is. 

85.  The  monks  and  nuns  at  the  time  being,  who 
strove  after  supreme,  highest  enlightenment,  nume- 
rous as  sand  of  the  Ganges,  applied  themselves  to 
the  commandment  of  the  Sugata. 

86.  And  the  monk  who  then  was  the  preacher  of 
the  law  and  the  keeper  of  the  law,  Varaprabha, 
expounded  for  fully  eighty  intermediate  kalpas  the 
highest  laws  according  to  the  commandment  (of  the 
Sugata). 

87.  He  had  eight  hundred  pupils,  who  all  of  them 
were  by  him  brought  to  full  development.  They 
saw  many  ko^'is  of  Buddhas,  great  sages,  whom  they 
worshipped. 

88.  By  following  the  regular  course  they  became 
Buddhas  in  several  spheres,  and  as  they  followed 


28  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  I. 

one  another  in  immediate  succession  they  suc- 
cessively foretold  each  other's  future  destiny  to 
Buddhaship. 

89.  The  last  of  these  Buddhas  following  one 
another  was  Dipahkara.  He,  the  supreme  god  of 
gods,  honoured  by  crowds  of  sages,  educated  thou- 
sands of  ko/is  of  living  beings. 

90.  Among  the  pupils  of  Varaprabha,  the  son  of 
6^ina,  at  the  time  of  his  teaching  the  law,  was  one 
slothful,  covetous,  greedy  of  gain  and  cleverness. 

91.  He  was  also  excessively  desirous  of  glory, 
but  very  fickle,  so  that  the  lessons  dictated  to  him 
and  his  own  reading  faded  from  his  memory  as  soon 
as  learnt. 

92.  His  name  was  Ya^-askama,  by  which  he  w^as 
known  everywhere.  By  the  accumulated  merit  ^  of 
that  good  action,  spotted  as  it  was, 

93.  He  propitiated  thousands  of  ko/is  of  Buddhas, 
whom  he  rendered  ample  honour.  He  went  through 
the  regular  course  of  duties  and  saw  the  present 
Buddha  6akyasi;;^ha. 

94.  He  shall  be  the  last  to  reach  superior  en- 
lightenment and  become  a  Lord  known  by  the  family 
name  of  Maitreya,  who  shall  educate  thousands  of 
ko/is  of  creatures. 


^  The  MSS.  have  tenakuj'alenakarma«a,tenokujalena  kar- 
ma;?a.  As  teno  and  tena  in  the  stanzas  are  occasionally  used  instead 
of  tena,  it  is  uncertain  whether  tenak.  is  to  be  separated  into  tena 
and  akuj-ala.  This  much  is  clear,  that  the  author  of  the  foregoing 
prose  text  has  taken  the  words  as  tena  (Vedic  the  same)  or  teno,  and 
kujala.  The  good  in  Ya^-askama  was  his  love  of  renown,  of  good 
fame.  Maitreya,  by  his  very  nature,  holds  a  middle  position  be- 
tween black  night  and  bright  daylight ;  INIithra  also  is  represented 

as  a  fxea'iTr]^, 


INTRODUCTORY.  29 


95.  He  who  then,  under  the  rule  of  the  extinct 
Sugata,  was  so  slothful,  was  thyself,  and  it  was  I 
who  then  was  the  preacher  of  the  law. 

96.  As  on  seeing  a  foretoken  of  this  kind  I  re- 
cognise a  sien  such  as  I  have  seen  manifested  of 
yore,  therefore  and  on  that  account  I  know, 

97.  That  decidedly  the  chief  of  6'inas,  the  su- 
preme king  of  the  ^akyas,  the  All-seeing,  who 
knows  the  highest  truth,  is  about  to  pronounce  the 
excellent  Sutra  which  I  have  heard  before. 

98.  That  very  sign  displayed  at  present  is  a  proof 
of  the  skilfulness  of  the  leaders  ;  the  Lion  of  the 
6'akyas  is  to  make  an  exhortation,  to  declare  the 
fixed  nature  of  the  law. 

99.  Be  well  prepared  and  well  minded ;  join  your 
hands  :  he  who  is  affectionate  and  merciful  to  the 
world  is  going  to  speak,  is  going  to  pour  the  endless 
rain  of  the  law  and  refresh  those  that  are  waiting  for 
enlightenment. 

100.  And  if  some  should  feel  doubt,  uncertainty, 
or  misgiving  in  any  respect,  then  the  Wise  One 
shall  remove  it  for  his  children,  the  Bodhisattvas 
here  striving  after  enlightenment. 


30  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  11. 


CHAPTER   II. 


SKILFULNESS^. 


The  Lord  then  rose  with  recollection  and  con- 
sciousness from  his  meditation,  and  forthwith 
addressed  the  venerable  ^'ariputra :  The  Buddha 
knowledge,  ^ariputra,  is  profound,  difficult  to  under- 
stand, difficult  to  comprehend.  It  is  difficult  for  all 
disciples  and  Pratyekabuddhas  to  fathom  the  know- 
ledge arrived  at  by  the  Tathagatas,  &c.,  and  that, 
^'ariputra,  because  the  Tathagatas  have  worshipped 
many  hundred  thousand  myriads  of  ko/is  of  Buddhas  ; 
because  they  have  fulfilled  their  course  for  supreme, 
complete  enlightenment,  during  many  hundred  thou- 
sand myriads  of  ko/is  of  ^ons  ;  because  they  have 
wandered  far,  displaying  energy  and  possessed  of 
wonderful  and  marvellous  properties ;  possessed  of 
properties  difficult  to  understand  ;  because  they  have 
found  out  things  difficult  to  understand. 

The  mystery  2  of  the  Tathagatas,  &c.,  is  difficult 
to  understand,  ^'ariputra,  because  when  they  explain 
the  laws  (or   phenomena,   things)   that   have   their 


^  Or,  able  management,  diplomacy,  upayakau^alya.  Upaya 
means  an  expedient,  but  with  the  Pra§-fiikas  it  denotes  the  energy 
of  Pra^«a,  the  latter  being  Nature,  otherwise  called  Maya;  see  B. 
H,  Hodgson,  Essays  on  the  Languages,  Literature,  and  Religion  of 
Nepal  and  Tibet,  p.  104;  cf.  pp.  72,  78,  89.  From  the  atheistic 
point  of  view  the  possessor  of  upayakaui'alya  can  hardly  be  any- 
thing else  but  all-ruling  Time  ;  regarded  from  the  theistic  view  he 
must  be  the  Almighty  Spirit. 

2  Sandha-bhashya;  on  this  term  more  in  the  sequel. 


11.  SKILFULNESS.  3 1 

causes  in  themselves  they  do  so  by  means  of  skilful- 
ness,  by  the  display  of  knowledge,  by  arguments, 
reasons,  fundamental  ideas,  interpretations,  and  sug- 
gestions. By  a  variety  of  skilfulness  they  are  able 
to  release  creatures  that  are  attached  to  one  point 
or  another.  The  Tathagatas,  &c.,  ^'ariputra,  have 
acquired  the  highest  perfection  in  skilfulness  and 
the  display  of  knowledge ;  they  are  endowed  with 
wonderful  properties,  such  as  the  display  of  free 
and  unchecked  knowledge;  the  powers^;  the  ab- 
sence of  hesitation  ;  the  independent  conditions  - ; 
the  strength  of  the  organs ;  the  constituents  of 
Bodhi^;  the  contemplations ;  emancipations^;  medi- 
tations ;  the  degrees  of  concentration  of  mind.  The 
Tathagatas,  &c.,  ^'ariputra,  are  able  to  expound 
various  things  and  have  something  wonderful  and 
marvellous.  Enough,  ^'ariputra,  let  it  suffice  to  say, 
that  the  Tathagatas,  &c.,  have  something  extremely 


^  Here  will  be  meant  the  ten  powers,  whence  the  epithet  of  Da^a- 
bala  applied  to  a  Buddha;  they  are  enumerated  in  S.  Hardy's 
Manual,  p.  379.  Other  enumerations  count  four,  five,  or  seven 
powers. 

^  Or  rather,  the  uncommon,  not  vulgar  properties  which  distin- 
guish the  saints  from  the  vulgar;  these  ave;zikadharmas,  also 
called  buddhadharmas,  are  eighteen  in  number;  S.  Hardy's 
Manual,  p.  381. 

^  The  seven  Bodhyangas,  viz.  recollection,  investigation,  energy, 
joyfulness,  calm,  contemplation,  and  equanimity. 

*  Vimoksha,  vimukti,  for  which  see  Burnoufs  Appendix  to 
the  Lotus,  p.  824  sqq.  According  to  the  view  there  expressed  the 
eight  Vimokshas  are  as  many  states  of  intellect  which  the  thinking 
sage  is  going  through  in  his  effort  to  emancipate  himself  from  the 
versatile  world;  cf,  Lotus,  p.  543.  There  is  also  a  threefold  Vi- 
moksha, mentioned  by  Childers,  PaR  Diet.,  p.  270;  it  may  be  com- 
pared with  the  threefold  -^itta-vimukti  in  the  Yoga  system;  see 
Comm.  on  Yoga^astra,  2,  27. 


32  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  II. 


O 


wonderful,  ^'ariputra.  None  but  a  Tathagata,  .S'ari- 
putra,  can  impart  to  a  Tathagata  those  laws  which 
the  Tathagata  knows.  And  all  laws,  ^'ariputra,  are 
taught  by  the  Tathagata,  and  by  him  alone ;  no  one 
but  he  knows  all  laws,  what  they  are,  how  they  are, 
like  what  they  are,  of  what  characteristics  and  of 
what  nature  they  are. 

And  on  that  occasion,  to  set  forth  the  same  sub- 
ject more  copiously,  the  Lord  uttered  the  following 
stanzas  : 

1.  Innumerable  are  the  great  heroes  in  the  world 
that  embraces  gods  and  men ;  the  totality  of  crea- 
tures is  unable  to  completely  know  the  leaders. 

2.  None  can  know  their  powers  and  states  of 
emancipation,  their  absence  of  hesitation  and  Buddha 
properties,  such  as  they  are. 

3.  Of  yore  have  I  followed  in  presence  of  ko/is  of 
Buddhas  the  good  course  which  is  profound,  subtle, 
difficult  to  understand,  and  most  difficult  to  find. 

4.  After  pursuing  that  career  during  an  incon- 
ceivable number  of  ko/is  of  ^ons,  I  have  on 
the  terrace  of  enlightenment  discovered  the  fruit 
thereof. 

5.  And  therefore  I  recognise,  like  the  other  chiefs 
of  the  world,  how  it  is,  like  what  it  is,  and  what  are 
its  characteristics. 

6.  It  is  impossible  to  explain  it;  it  is  unutterable; 
nor  is  there  such  a  being  in  the  world 

7.  To  whom  this  law  could  be  explained  or  who 
would  be  able  to  understand  It  when  explained,  with 
exception  of  the  Bodhisattvas,  those  who  are  firm 
in  resolve. 

8.  As  to  the  disciples  of  the  Knower  of  the  world, 
those  who  have  done  their  duty  and  received  praise 


11.  SKILFULNESS.  33 

from  the  Sugatas,  who  are  freed  from  faults  and 
have  arrived  at  the  last  stage  of  bodily  existence, 
the  6'ina-knowledge  lies  beyond  their  sphere. 

9.  If  this  whole  sphere  were  full  of  beings  like 
vSarisuta,  and  if  they  were  to  investigate  with  com- 
bined efforts,  they  would  be  unable  to  comprehend 
the  knowledge  of  the  Sugata. 

10.  Even  if  the  ten  points  of  space  were  full  of 
sages  like  thee,  ay,  if  they  were  full  of  such  as  the 
rest  of  my  disciples, 

11.  And  if  those  beings  combined  were  to  in- 
vestigate the  knowledge  of  the  Sugata,  they  would, 
all  together,  not  be  able  to  comprehend  the  Buddha- 
knowledge  in  its  whole  immensity. 

12.  If  the  ten  points  of  space  were  filled  with 
Pratyekabuddhas,  free  from  faults,  gifted  with  acute 
faculties,  and  standing  in  the  last  stage  of  their 
existence,  as  numerous  as  reeds  and  bamboos  in 
the  woods ; 

13.  And  if  combined  for  an  endless  number  of 
myriads  of  ko/is  of  yEons,  they  were  to  investigate 
a  part  only  of  my  superior  laws,  they  would  never 
find  out  its  real  meaning. 

14.  If  the  ten  points  of  space  were  full  of  Bodhi- 
sattvas  who,  after  having  done  their  duty  under 
many  ko/is  of  Buddhas,  investigated  all  things  and 
preached  many  sermons,  after  entering  a  new 
vehicle  ^ ; 

15.  If  the  whole  world  were  full  of  them,  as  of 
dense  reeds  and  bamboos,  without  any  interstices, 
and  if  all  combined  were  to  investigate  the  law  which 
the  Sugata  has  realised  ; 

^  Or  rather,  a  new  career. 
[21]  D 


A, 


34  SADDHARMA-PUiVZ>ARlKA.  II. 

1 6.  If  they  were  going  on  investigating  for  many 
ko/is  of  ^ons,  as  incalculable  as  the  sand  of  the 
Ganges,  with  undivided  attention  and  subtle  wit, 
even  then  that  (knowledge)  would  be  beyond  their 
ken. 

17.  If  such  Bodhisattvas  as  are  unable  to  fall 
back,  numerous  as  the  sand  of  the  Ganges,  were 
to  investigate  it  with  undivided  attention,  it  would 
prove  to  lie  beyond  their  ken. 

18.  Profound  are  the  laws  of  the  Buddhas,  and 
subtle  ;  all  inscrutable  and  faultless.  I  myself  know 
them  as  well  as  the  G^inas  do  in  the  ten  directions 
of  the  world. 

19.  Thou,  ^'ariputra,  be  full  of  trust  in  what  the 
Sugata  declares.  The  G'ma.  speaks  no  falsehood, 
the  great  Seer  who  has  so  long  preached  the  highest 
truth. 

20.  I  address  all  disciples  here,  those  who  have 
set  out  to  reach  the  enlightenment  of  Pratyeka- 
buddhas,  those  who  are  roused  to  activity  at  my 
Nirva^^a^,  and  those  who  have  been  released  from 
the  series  of  evils. 

21.  It  is  by  my  superior  skilfulness  that  I  explain 
the  law  at  great  length  to  the  world  at  large.  I 
deliver  whosoever  are  attached  to  one  point  or 
another,  and  show  the  three  vehicles^. 

The  eminent  disciples  in  the  assembly  headed  by 
A^;'^ata-Kau;/«^inya,  the  twelve  hundred  Arhats  fault- 
less and  self-controlled,  the  other  monks,  nuns,  male 
and  female  lay  devotees  using  the  vehicle  of  disciples, 
and  those  who  had  entered  the  vehicle  of  Pratyeka- 


^  Or,  who  by  me  are  established  in  Nirva«a. 

^  The  word  yana  in  the  text  also  means  'a  career,  course.' 


II.  SKILFULNESS.  35 

buddhas,  all  of  them  made  this  reflection :  What 
may  be  the  cause,  what  the  reason  of  the  Lord  so 
extremely  extolling  the  skilfulness  of  the  Tatha- 
gatas  ?  of  his  extolling  it  by  saying,  '  Profound  is 
the  law  by  me  discovered;'  of  his  extolling  it  by 
saying,  '  It  is  difficult  for  all  disciples  and  Pratyeka- 
buddhas  to  Understand  it.'  But  as  yet  the  Lord  has 
declared  no  more  than  one  kind  of  emancipation, 
and  therefore  we  also  should  acquire  the  Buddha- 
laws  on  reaching  Nirva;2a.  We  do  not  catch  the 
meaning  of  this  utterance  of  the  Lord. 

And  the  venerable  .Sariputra,  who  apprehended 
the  doubt  and  uncertainty  of  the  four  classes  of  the 
audience  and  g-uessed  their  thouo-hts  from  what  was 
passing  in  his  own  mind,  himself  being  in  doubt  about 
the  law,  then  said  to  the  Lord  :  What,  O  Lord,  is 
the  cause,  what  the  reason  of  the  Lord  so  repeatedly 
and  extremely  extolling  the  skilfulness,  knowledge, 
and  preaching  of  the  Tathagata  ?  Why  does  he 
repeatedly  extol  it  by  saying,  '  Profound  is  the  law 
by  me  discovered ;  it  is  difficult  to  understand  the 
mystery  of  the  Tathagatas.'  Never  before  have  I 
heard  from  the  Lord  such  a  discourse  on  the  law. 
These  four  classes  of  the  audience,  O  Lord,  are 
overcome  with  doubt  and  perplexity.  Therefore 
may  the  Lord  be  pleased  to  explain  what  the  Tatha- 
gata is  alluding  to,  when  repeatedly  extolling  the 
profound  law  of  the  Tathagatas. 

On  that  occasion  the  venerable  6ariputra  uttered 
the  following  stanzas  : 

2  2.  Now  first  does  the  Sun  of  men  utter  such  a 
speech  :  '  I  have  acquired  the  powers,  emancipations, 
and  numberless  meditations,' 

23.  And  thou  mentionest  the  terrace  of  enllghten- 

D  2 


36  SADDHARMA-PUiVZlARlKA.  II. 

ment  without  any  one  asking  thee  ;  thou  mentlonest 
the  mystery,  although  no  one  asks  thee. 

24.  Thou  speakest  unasked  and  laudest  thine  own 
course  ;  thou  mentionest  thy  having  obtained  know- 
ledge and  pronouncest  profound  words. 

25.  To-day  a  question  rises  in  my  mind  and  of 
these  self-controlled,  faultless  beings  striving  after 
Nirva;^a  :  Why  does  the  6^ina  speak  in  this  manner? 

26.  Those  who  aspire  to  the  enlightenment  of 
PratyekabuddhaSj  the  nuns  and  monks,  gods,  Nagas, 
goblins,  Gandharvas,  and  great  serpents,  are  talking 
together,  while  looking  up  to  the  highest  of  men, 

27.  And  ponder  in  perplexity.  Give  an  elucida- 
tion, great  Sage,  to  all  the  disciples  of  Sugata  here 
assembled. 

28.  Myself  have  reached  the  perfection  (of  virtue), 
have  been  taught  by  the  supreme  Sage  ;  still,  O 
highest  of  men !  even  in  my  position  I  feel  some 
doubt  whether  the  course  (of  duty)  shown  to  me 
shall  receive  its  final  sanction  by  Nirva;/a. 

29.  Let  thy  voice  be  heard,  O  thou  whose  voice 
resounds  like  an  egregious  kettle-drum  !  proclaim  thy 
law  such  as  it  is.  The  legitimate  sons  of  6^ina  here 
standing  and  gazing  at  the  6^ina,  with  joined  hands  ; 

30.  As  well  as  the  gods,  Nagas,  goblins.  Titans, 
numbering  thousands  of  ko/is,  like  sand  of  the 
Ganges ;  and  those  that  aspire  to  superior  en- 
lightenment, here  standing,  fully  eighty  thousand 
in  number ; 

31.  Further,  the  kings,  rulers  of  provinces  and 
paramount  monarchs,  who  have  flocked  hither  from 
thousands  of  ko/is  of  countries,  are  now  standing 
with  joined  hands,  and  respectful,  thinking  :  How 
are  we  to  fulfil  the  course  of  duty  ? 


II.  SKILFULNESS.  37 

The  venerable  ^ariputra  having  spoken,  the  Lord 
said  to  him  :  Enough,  ^'ariputra ;  it  is  of  no  use 
explaining  this  matter.  Why  ?  Because,  ^'ariputra, 
the  world,  including  the  gods,  would  be  frightened  if 
this  matter  were  expounded. 

But  the  venerable  .Sariputra  entreated  the  Lord 
a  second  time,  saying :  Let  the  Lord  expound,  let 
the  Sugata  expound  this  matter,  for  in  this  assembly, 
O  Lord,  there  are  many  hundreds,  many  thousands, 
many  hundred  thousands,  many  hundred  thousand 
myriads  of  ko^is  of  living  beings  who  have  seen 
former  Buddhas,  who  are  intelligent,  and  will  believe, 
value,  and  accept  the  words  of  the  Lord. 

The  venerable  6arlputra  addressed  the  Lord  with 
this  stanza  : 

32.  Speak  clearly,  O  most  eminent  of  G'inas  !  in 
this  assembly  there  are  thousands  of  living  beings 
trustful,  affectionate,  and  respectful  towards  the 
Sugata ;  they  will  understand  the  law  by  thee  ex- 
pounded. 

And  the  Lord  said  a  second  time  to  the  venerable 
6ariputra :  Enough,  ^Sariputra  ;  it  is  of  no  use  ex- 
plaining this  matter,  for  the  world,  including  the 
gods,  would  be  frightened,  6ariputra,  if  this  matter 
were  expounded,  and  some  monks  might  be  proud 
and  come  to  a  heavy  fall^. 

And  on  that  occasion  uttered  the  Lord  the  follow- 
ing stanza : 

2)2,'  Speak  no  more  of  it  that  I  should  declare  this 
law !  This  knowledge  is  too  subtle,  inscrutable,  and 
there  are  so  many  unwise  men  who  in  their  conceit 
and  foolishness  would  scoff  at  the  law  revealed. 

^  Or,  commit  a  great  offence. 


38  SADDHARMA-PUA^DARIKA.  II. 

A  third  time  the  venerable  K^ariputra  entreated 
the  Lord,  saying :  Let  the  Lord  expound,  let  the 
Sugata  expound  this  matter.  In  this  assembly,  O 
Lord,  there  are  many  hundreds  of  living  beings  my 
equals,  and  many  hundreds,  many  thousands,  many 
hundred  thousands,  many  hundred  thousand  myriads 
of  ko/is  of  other  living  beings  more,  who  in  former 
births  have  been  brought  by  the  Lord  to  full  ripe- 
ness. They  will  believe,  value,  and  accept  what  the 
Lord  declares,  which  shall  tend  to  their  advantage, 
weal,  and  happiness  in  length  of  time. 

On  that  occasion  the  venerable  6'ariputra  uttered 
the  following  stanzas  : 

34.  Explain  the  law,  O  thou  most  high  of  men ! 
I,  thine  eldest  son,  beseech  thee.  Here  are  thou- 
sands of  ko^'is  of  beings  w^ho  are  to  believe  in  the 
law  by  thee  revealed. 

35.  And  those  beings  that  in  former  births  so 
long  and  constantly  have  by  thee  been  brought  to 
full  maturity  and  now  are  all  standing  here  with 
joined  hands,  they,  too,  are  to  believe  in  this  law. 

36.  Let  the  Sugata,  seeing  the  twelve  hundred, 
my  equals,  and  those  who  are  striving  after  superior 
enlightenment,  speak  to  them  and  produce  in  them 
an  extreme  joy. 

When  the  Lord  for  the  third  time  heard  the 
entreaty  of  the  venerable  6ariputra,  he  spoke  to  him 
as  follows  :  Now  that  thou  entreatest  the  Tathagata 
a  third  time,  6ariputra,  I  will  answer  thee.  Listen 
then,  vSariputra,  take  well  and  duly  to  heart  what 
I  am  saying ;  I  am  going  to  speak. 

Now  it  happened  that  five  thousand  proud  monks, 
nuns,  and  lay  devotees  of  both  sexes  in  the  congre- 
gation rose  from  their  seats  and,  after  saluting  with 


IT.  SKILFULNESS.  39 


their  heads  the  Lord's  feet,  went  to  leave  the  assem- 
bly. Owing  to  the  principle  of  good  which  there  is 
in  pride  they  imagined  having  attained  what  they 
had  not,  and  having  understood  what  they  had  not. 
Therefore,  thinking  themselves  aggrieved,  they  went 
to  leave  the  assembly,  to  which  the  Lord  by  his 
silence  showed  assent. 

Thereupon  the  Lord  addressed  the  venerable 
^Sariputra :  My  congregation,  ^'ariputra,  has  been 
cleared  from  the  chaffy  freed  from  the  trash;  it  is 
firmly  established  in  the  strength  of  faith.  It  is  good, 
vSariputra,  that  those  proud  ones  are  gone  away. 
Now  I  am  going  to  expound  the  matter,  vSariputra. 
'  Very  well,  Lord,'  replied  the  venerable  ^'ariputra. 
The  Lord  then  began  and  said  : 

It  is  but  now  and  then,  KSariputra,  that  the  Tatha- 
gata  preaches  such  a  discourse  on  the  law  as  this. 
Just  as  but  now  and  then  is  seen  the  blossom  of  the 
glomerous  fig-tree,  ^'ariputra,  so  does  the  Tathagata 
but  now  and  then  preach  such  a  discourse  on  the 
law.  Believe  me,  ^'ariputra ;  I  speak  what  is  real, 
I  speak  what  is  truthful,  I  speak  what  is  right.  It  is 
difficult  to  understand  the  exposition  of  the  mystery 
of  the  Tathagata,  ^'ariputra ;  for  in  elucidating  the 
law,  .Sariputra,  I  use  hundred  thousands  of  various 
skilful  means,  such  as  different  interpretations,  indi- 
cations, explanations,  illustrations.  It  is  not  by 
reasoning,  ^S^ariputra,  that  the  law  is  to  be  found  : 
it  is  beyond  the  pale    of  reasoning,  and  must   be 

^  One  of  the  MSS.  has  nishpralava,  which  ought  to  be  nish- 
palava;  another  has  nishpudgalava.  Both  imaginary -words 
are  no  doubt  the  result  of  an  unhappy  attempt  to  Sanskritise  a  Pra- 
krit nippalava  by  scribes  unacquainted  with  the  Sanskrit  palava 
(Pali  palapa).     The  right  form  occurs  below,  stanza  40. 


40  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARiKA.  II. 

learnt  from  the  Tathagata.  For,  6'arlputra,  it  is 
for  a  sole  object,  a  sole  aim,  verily  a  lofty  object, 
a  lofty  aim  that  the  Buddha,  the  Tathagata,  &c., 
appears  in  the  world.  And  what  is  that  sole  object, 
that  sole  aim,  that  lofty  object,  that  lofty  aim  of  the 
Buddha,  the  Tathagata,  &c.,  appearing  in  the  world  ? 
To  show  all  creatures  the  sight  of  Tathagata-know- 
ledge^  does  the  Buddha,  the  Tathagata,  &c.,  appear 
in  the  world ;  to  open  the  eyes  of  creatures  for  the 
sight  of  Tathagata-knowledge  does  the  Buddha,  the 
Tathagata,  &c.,  appear  in  the  world.  This,  O  ^'ari- 
putra,  is  the  sole  object,  the  sole  aim,  the  sole  pur- 
pose of  his  appearance  in  the  world.  Such  then, 
^'ariputra,  is  the  sole  object,  the  sole  aim,  the  lofty 
object,  the  lofty  aim  of  the  Tathagata.  And  it  is 
achieved  by  the  Tathagata.  For,  ^'ariputra,  I  do  show 
all  creatures  the  sight  of  Tathagata-knowledge ;  I 
d  o  open  the  eyes  of  creatures  for  the  sight  of  Tatha- 
gata-knowledge, 6ariputra  ;  I  do  firmly  establish  the 
teaching  of  Tathagata-knowledge,  6'ariputra ;  I  do 
lead  the  teaching  of  Tathagata-knowledge  on  the 
right  path,  ^'ariputra.  By  means  of  one  sole  vehicle  2, 
to  wit,  the  Buddha-vehicle,  6'ariputra,  do  I  teach 
creatures  the  law;  there  is  no  second  vehicle,  nor 
a  third.  This  is  the  nature  of  the  law,  ^'ariputra, 
universally  in  the  world,  in  all  directions.  For, 
vSariputra,  all  the  Tathagatas,  &c.,  who  in  times 
past  existed  in  countless,  innumerable  spheres  in 
all  directions-  for  the  weal  of  many,  the  happiness 
of  many,  out  of  pity  to  the  world,  for  the  benefit, 
weal,  and  happiness  of  the  great  body  of  creatures, 

^  Or,  to  rouse  all  creatures  by  the  display  of  Tathagata-knowledge. 
"^  Rather  and  properly,  one  sole  course. 


II.  SKILFULNESS.  -41 


and  who  preached  the  law  to  gods  and  men  with 
able  means,  such  as  several  directions  and  indica- 
tions, various  arguments,  reasons,  illustrations,  fun- 
damental ideas,  interpretations,  paying  regard  to  the 
dispositions  of  creatures  whose  inclinations  and 
temperaments  are  so  manifold,  all  those  Buddhas 
and  Lords,  ^'ariputra,  have  preached  the  law  to 
creatures  by  means  of  only  one  vehicle,  the  Buddha- 
vehicle,  which  finally  leads  to  omniscience;  it  is 
identical  with  showing  all  creatures  the  sight  of 
Tathagata-knowledge ;  wath  opening  the  eyes  of 
creatures  for  the  sight  of  Tathagata-knowledge ; 
with  the  awakening  (or  admonishing)  by  the  dis- 
play (or  sight)  of  Tathagata-knowledge  ^  with 
leading  the  teaching  of  Tathagata-knowledge  on  the 
right  path.  Such  is  the  law  they  have  preached  to 
creatures.  And  those  creatures,  ^'ariputra,  who  have 
heard  the  law  from  the  past  Tathagatas,  &c.,  have 
all  of  them  reached  supreme,  perfect  enlightenment. 

And  the  Tathagatas,  &c.,  who  shall  exist  in 
future,  ^'ariputra,  in  countless,  innumerable  spheres 
in  all  directions  for  the  weal  of  many,  the  happi- 
ness of  many,  out  of  pity  to  the  world,  for  the 
benefit,  weal,  and  happiness  of  the  great  body  of 
creatures,  and  who  shall  preach  the  law  to  gods  and 
men  (&c.,  as  above  till)  the  right  path.  Such  is  the 
law  they  shall  preach  to  creatures.  And  those 
creatures,  ^'ariputra,  who  shall  hear  the  law  from 
the  future  Tathagatas,  &c.,  shall  all  of  them  reach 
supreme,  perfect  enlightenment. 

And  the  Tathagatas,  &c.,  who  now  at  present  are 


^  One  MS.  has  Tathagata^Tianade^anapratibodhana  ;  the 
other  "^dari'ana"  instead  of  "^de^ana". 


42  saddharma-pua^z)Ar{ka.  it. 

staying,  living,  existing,  ^'ariputra,  in  countless,  innu- 
merable spheres  in  all  directions,  &c.,  and  who  are 
preaching  the  law  to  gods  and  men  (&c.,  as  above 
till)  the  right  path.  Such  is  the  law  they  are 
preaching  to  creatures.  And  those  creatures,  ^ari- 
putra,  who  are  hearing  the  law  from  the  present 
Tathagatas,  &c.,  shall  all  of  them  reach  supreme, 
perfect  enlightenment. 

I  myself  also,  6'ariputra,  am  at  the  present  period  a 
Tathagata,  &c.,  for  the  weal  of  many  (&c.,  till)  mani- 
fold ;  I  myself  also,  ^'ariputra,  am  preaching  the  law 
to  creatures  (&c.,  till)  the  right  path.  Such  is  the  law 
I  preach  to  creatures.  And  those  creatures,  vS'ari- 
putra,  who  now  are  hearing  the  law  from  me,  shall 
all  of  them  reach  supreme,  perfect  enlightenment. 
In  this  sense,  ^'ariputra,  it  must  be  understood  that 
nowhere  in  the  world  a  second  vehicle  is  taught,  far 
less  a  third. 

Yet,  K^ariputra,  when  the  Tathagatas,  &c.,  happen 
to  appear  at  the  decay  ^  of  the  epoch,  the  decay  of 
creatures,  the  decay  of  besetting  sins  ^,  the  decay  of 
views,  or  the  decay  of  lifetime ;  when  they  appear 
amid  such  signs  of  decay  at  the  disturbance  of  the 
epoch ;  when  creatures  are  much  tainted,  full  of 
greed  and  poor  In  roots  of  goodness  ;  then,  ^'ari- 
putra,  the  Tathagatas,  &c.,  use,  skilfully,  to  desig- 
nate that  one  and  sole  Buddha-vehicle  by  the 
appellation  of  the  threefold  vehicle.  Now,  ^'ari- 
putra,   such   disciples,  Arhats,  or   Pratyekabuddhas 


^  One  MS.  has  °kashayeshu  in  the  plural,  literally 'the  dregs.' 
^  Klejakashaya,  which  Burnouf  renders  by  'la  corruption  du 
mal.'     I  think  we  might  paraphrase  the  term  used  in  the  text  by 
saying,  the  time  when  the   besetting    sins  or  natural  depravities 
show  themselves  at  their  very  worst. 


II.  SKILFULNESS.  43 

who  do  not  hear  their  actually  being  called  to  the 
Buddha- vehicle  by  the  Tathagata,  who  do  not  per- 
ceive, nor  heed  it,  those,  6ariputra,  should  not  be 
acknowledged  as  disciples  of  the  Tathagata,  nor  as 
Arhats,  nor  as  Pratyekabuddhas. 

Again,  .Sariputra,  if  there  be  some  monk  or  nun 
pretending  to  Arhatship  without  an  earnest  vow  to 
reach  supreme,  perfect  enlightenment  and  saying,  '  I 
am  standing  too  high^  for  the  Buddha- vehicle,  I  am 
in  my  last  appearance  in  the  body  before  complete 
Nirva?2a,'  then,  ^'ariputra,  consider  such  a  one  to  be 
conceited.  For,  6ariputra,  it  is  unfit,  it  is  improper 
that  a  monk,  a  faultless  Arhat,  should  not  believe  in 
the  law  which  he  hears  from  the  Tathagfata  in  his 
presence.  I  leave  out  of  question  when  the  Tatha- 
gata shall  have  reached  complete  Nirva;^a ;  for  at 
that  period,  that  time,  .^'ariputra,  when  the  Tatha- 
gata shall  be  wholly  extinct,  there  shall  be  none 
who  either  knows  by  heart  or  preaches  such  Sutras 
as  this.  It  will  be  under  other  Tathagatas,  &c.,  that 
they  are  to  be  freed  from  doubts.  In  respect  to  these 
things  believe  my  words,  ^'ariputra,  value  them, 
take  them  to  heart ;  for  there  is  no  falsehood  in  the 
Tathagatas,  ^Sariputra.  There  is  but  one  vehicle, 
6'ariputra,  and  that  the  Buddha-vehicle. 

And  on  that  occasion  to  set  forth  this  matter 
more  copiously  the  Lord  uttered  the  following 
stanzas  : 

^  Accordingto  thereadingutsanna;  another  MS.  has  u/^/^/^inna, 
the  reading  followed  by  Burnouf,  for  he  renders  it  by  'exclu.'  The 
form  u>^y^;^inna  could  the  more  easily  creep  in,  because  instead  of 
utsanna  we  often  find  U/('^y^anna,  which,  in  fact,  I  believe  to  be 
the  true  form,  for  the  word  may  be  derived  from  jad,  akin  to 
Latin  cedo,  Greek  KiKaa-ixai;  the  usual  spelling,  however,  is  ut- 
sanna. 


44  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  IT. 

2)J.  No  less  than  five  thousand  monks,  nuns,  and 
lay  devotees  of  both  sexes,  full  of  unbelief  and 
conceit, 

38.  Remarking  this  slight,  went,  defective  in 
training  and  foolish  as  they  were,  away  in  order 
to  beware  of  damage. 

39.  The  Lord,  who  knew  them  to  be  the  dregs  of 
the  congregation,  exclaimed^:  They  have  no  suffi- 
cient merit  to  hear  this  law. 

40.  My  congregation  is  now  pure  ^,  freed  from 
chaff;  the  trash  is  removed  and  the  pith  only 
remains. 

41.  Hear  from  me,  6'ariputra,  how  this  law  has 
been  discovered  by  the  highest  man  ^,  and  how  the 
mighty  Buddhas  are  preaching  it  with  many  hundred 
proofs  of  skilfulness. 

42.  I  know  the  disposition  and  conduct,  the 
various  inclinations  of  ko/is  of  living  beings  in 
this  world  ;  I  know  their  various  actions  and  the 
good  they  have  done  before. 

43.  Those  living  beings  I  initiate  in  this  (law)  by 
the  aid  of  manifold  interpretations  and  reasons  ;  and 
by  hundreds  of  arguments  and  illustrations  have  I, 
in  one  way  or  another,  gladdened  all  creatures. 

44.  I   utter   both   Sutras   and  stanzas ;    legends, 

^  The  two  preceding  stanzas  and  the  half  of  this  stanza  make  no 
part  of  the  Lord's  speech.  It  appears  that  the  maker  of  the  prose 
text  has  worked  upon  the  older  text  in  poetry,  and  on  this  occasion 
has  been  at  a  loss  how  to  connect  the  latter  with  the  former.  The 
matter  is  easily  explained  on  the  assumption  that  the  verses  con- 
tained the  ancient  text,  and  therefore  were  treated  with  the  greatest 
scruples. 

^  Buddha;  Burnouf  rendering  'ayant  de  la  foi'  has  followed 
another  reading,  jraddha. 

^  The  term  used  is  Purushottama,  a  well-known  epithet  of 
Vish?m. 


11.  SKILFULNESS.  45 


6^atakas  ^  and  prodigies,  besides  hundreds  of  intro- 
ductions and  curious  parables. 

45.  I  show  Nirva;^a  to  the  ignorant  with  low 
dispositions,  who  have  followed  no  course  of  duty 
under  many  ko/is  of  Buddhas,  are  bound  to  con- 
tinued existence  and  wretched. 

46.  The  self-born  one  uses  such  means  to  mani- 
fest Buddha-knowledge,  but  he  shall  never  say  to 
them.  Ye  also  are  to  become  Buddhas  ^. 

47.  Why  should  not  the  mighty'^  one,  after  having 
waited  for  the  right  time,  speak,  now  that  he  per- 
ceives the  right  moment  is  come  ?  This  is  the  fit 
opportunity,  met  somehow,  of  commencing  the  ex- 
position of  what  really  is. 

48.  Now  the  word  of  my  commandment,  as  con- 
tained in  nine  divisions  *,  has  been  published  accord- 
ing to  the  varying  degree  of  strength  of  creatures. 
Such  is  the  device  I  have  shown  in  order  to  intro- 
duce (creatures)  to  the  knowledge  of  the  giver  of 
boons. 

49.  And  to  those  In  the  world  who  have  always 
been  pure,  wise,  good-minded,  compassionate  sons 


^  Moralising  tales  and  fables,  so-called  birth  stories.  Of  the  Pali 
version  of  those  tales  a  part  has  been  edited  by  Professor  Fausboll 
and  translated  by  Dr.  Rhys  Davids. 

^  The  reading  is  uncertain;  one  MS.  has  yushme  pi  bud- 
dheka  (!)  bhavishyatheti;  another  yushmaipi  buddhehi  bha- 
vishati  (!). 

^  Tayin;  here  one  might  translate  the  word  by  'able,  clever.' 

*  The  nine  divisions,  according  to  the  matter,  of  Scripture,  are 
with  the  Southern  Buddhists,  Sutta,  Geya,  Veyyakarawa,  Gatha, 
Udana,  Itivuttaka,  G'ataka,  Abbhutadhamma,  and  Vedalla,  to  which 
answer  in  the  Northern  enumeration  Sutra,  Geya,  Vaiyakarawa, 
Gatha,  Udana,  Ityukta  (or  Itivrz'ttika),  G^ataka,  Adbhutadharma,  and 
Vaipulya ;  see  Burnouf,  Introduction,  p.  51  sqq. 


46  SADDHARMA-PUJVZ)ARIKA.  II. 

of  Buddha  and  done  thel  rduty  under  many  ko/is  of 
Buddhas  will  I  make  known  amplified  Siitras. 

50.  For  they  are  endowed  with  such  gifts  of 
mental  disposition  and  such  advantages  of  a  blame- 
less outward  form  ^  that  I  can  announce  to  them  :  in 
future  ye  shall  become  Buddhas  benevolent  and 
compassionate. 

51.  Hearing  which,  all  of  them  will  be  pervaded 
with  delight  (at  the  thought)  :  We  shall  become 
Buddhas  pre-eminent  in  the  world.  And  I,  per- 
ceiving their  conduct,  will  again  reveal  amplified 
Sutras. 

52.  And  those  are  the  disciples  of  the  Leader, 
who  have  listened  to  my  word  of  command.  One 
single  stanza  learnt  or  kept  in  memory  suffices,  no 
doubt  of  it,  to  lead  all  of  them  to  enlightenment. 

53.  There  is,  indeed,  but  one  vehicle ;  there  is  no 
second,  nor  a  third  anywhere  in  the  world,  apart 
from  the  case  of  the  Purushottamas  using  an  expe- 
dient to  show  that  there  is  a  diversity  of  vehicles. 

54.  The  Chief  of  the  world  appears  in  the  world 
to  reveal  the  Buddha-knowledge.  He  has  but  one 
aim,  indeed,  no  second ;  the  Buddhas  do  not  bring 
over  (creatures)  by  an  inferior  vehicle. 

55.  There  where  the  self-born  one  has  established 
himself,  and  where  the  object  of  knowledge  is,  of  what- 
ever form  or  kind ;  (where)  the  powers,  the  stages  of 
meditation,  the  emancipations,  the  perfected  faculties 
(are);  there  the  beings  also  shall  be  established. 

56.  I  should  be  guilty  of  envy,  should  I,  after 


^  The  text  has:  tathahi  te  asayajampadahi  visuddharupa- 
yasamanvita  'bhfit.  This  abhut  is  rather  an  unhappy  attempt 
at  Sanskritising  a  Prakrit  ahuw  or  ahu,  than  a  singular  used  for 
a  plural.     Sam  pad  and  ay  a  are  nearly  synonymous  terms. 


TI.  SKILFULNESS.  47 

reaching  the  spotless  eminent  state  of  enhghtenment, 
estabHsh  any  one  in  the  inferior  vehicle.  That 
would  not  beseem  me. 

57.  There  is  no  envy  whatever  in  me;  no 
jealousy,  no  desire,  nor  passion.  Therefore  I  am 
the  Buddha,  because  the  world  follows  my  teaching^ 

58.  When,  splendidly  marked  with  (the  thirty- 
two)  characteristics,  I  am  illuminating  this  whole 
world,  and,  worshipped  by  many  hundreds  of  beings, 
I  show  the  (unmistakable)  stamp  of  the  nature  of 
the  law ; 

59.  Then,  ^'ariputra,  I  think  thus  :  How  will  all 
beings  by  the  thirty-two  characteristics  mark  the 
self-born  Seer,  who  of  his  own  accord  sheds  his 
lustre  all  over  the  world  ? 

60.  And  while  I  am  thinking  and  pondering, 
when  my  wish  has  been  fulfilled  and  my  vow 
accomplished,  I  no  more^  reveal  Buddha-knowledge. 

61.  If,  O  son  of  ^'ari^,  I  spoke  to  the  creatures, 
*  Vivify  in  your  minds  the  wish  for  enlightenment,' 
they  would  in  their  ignorance  all  go  astray  and 
never  catch  the  meaning  of  my  good  words. 

62.  And  considering  them  to  be  such,  and  that 
they  have  not  accomplished  their  course  of  duty  in 
previous  existences,  (I  see  how)  they  are  attached 
and  devoted  to  sensual  pleasures,  infatuated  by 
desire  and  blind  with  delusion. 


^  Anubodhat,  which  may  be  rendered  otherwise,  '(because  the 
world)  perceives  me/ 

^  One  MS.  reads  ^^a,  *and/  for  na,  'not.' 

^  -Sarisuta,  otherwise  ^ariputra.  -Sarika  or  sarika  is  the  Turdus 
Salica,  one  of  whose  other  names  is  duti,  masc.  duta.  It  is 
hardly  a  mere  play  of  chance  that  6ariputra  in  ^ullavagga  VII,  4 
is  praised  as  being  an  excellent  d^ta. 


48  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  II. 

63.  From  lust  they  run  into  distress  ;  they  are  tor- 
mented in  the  six  states  of  existence  and  people  the 
cemetery  ^  again  and  again ;  they  are  overwhelmed 
with  misfortune,  as  they  possess  little  virtue. 

64.  They  are  continually  entangled  in  the  thickets 
of  (sectarian)  theories,  such  as,  '  It  is  and  It  is  not; 
it  Is  thus  and  it  Is  not  thus.'  In  trying  to  get  a 
decided  opinion  on  what  Is  found  in  the  sixty-two 
(heretical)  theories  they  come  to  embrace  falsehood 
and  continue  in  it. 

65.  They  are  hard  to  correct,  proud,  hypocritical, 
crooked,  malignant.  Ignorant,  dull ;  hence  they  do 
not  hear  the  good  Buddha-call,  not  once  in  ko/is  of 
births. 

66.  To  those,  son  of  Sslt'i,  I  show  a  device  and 
say  :  Put  an  end  to  your  trouble.  When  I  perceive 
creatures  vexed  with  mishap  I  make  them  see 
Nirva/^a. 

67.  And  so  do  I  reveal  all  those  laws  that  are 
ever  holy  and  correct  from  the  very  first.  And  the 
son  of  Buddha  who  has  completed  his  course  shall 
once  be  a  6^Ina. 

68.  It  is  but  my  skilfulness  which  prompts  me  to 
manifest  three  vehicles  ;  for  there  is  but  one  vehicle 
and  one  track  ^ ;  there  is  also  but  one  instruction  by 
the  leaders. 

69.  Remove  all  doubt  and  uncertainty;  and  should 


^  Ka/awsi  vardhenti.  This  is  a  strangely  altered  ka/asi?;; 
vardhenti,  Pali  ka/asi»^  vdiddhenti;  see  Aullavagga  XII,  i,  3, 
and  cf.  the  expression  ka/asivaa'f/^ano  in  Gataka  (ed.  Fausboll) 
I,  p.  146,  and  the  passage  of  Apastamba  II,  9,  23,  4  (in  Biihler's 
transl.  p.  156),  where  cemeteries,  ^majanani,  by  the  commentator 
Haradatta,  are  said  to  denote  '  fresh  births.' 

^  Or,  method. 


II.  SKILFULNESS.  49 

there  be  any  who  feel  doubts,  (let  them  know  that) 
the  Lords  of  the  world  speak  the  truth ;  this  is  the 
only  vehicle,  a  second  there  is  not. 

70.  The  former  Tathagatas  also,  living  in  the  past 
for  innumerable  ^ons,  the  many  thousands  of  Bud- 
dhas  who  are  gone  to  final  rest,  whose  number  can 
never  be  counted, 

7 1 .  Those  highest  of  men  ^  have  all  of  them  re- 
vealed most  holy  laws  by  means  of  illustrations, 
reasons,  and  arguments,  with  many  hundred  proofs 
of  skilfulness. 

72.  And  all  of  them  have  manifested  but  one 
vehicle  and  introduced  but  one  on  earth ;  by  one 
vehicle  have  they  led  to  full  ripeness  inconceivably 
many  thousands  of  ko^is  of  beings. 

73.  Yet  the  6^inas  possess  various  and  manifold 
means  through  which  the  Tathagata  reveals  to  the 
world,  including  the  gods,  superior  enlightenment,  in 
consideration  of  the  inclinations  and  dispositions  (of 
the  different  beings), 

74.  And  all  in  the  world  who  are  hearing  or 
have  heard  the  law  from  the  mouth  of  the  Tatha- 
gatas, given  alms,  followed  the  moral  precepts,  and 
patiently  accomplished  the  whole  of  their  religious 
duties ; 

75.  Who  have  acquitted  themselves  in  point  of 
zeal  and  meditation,  with  wisdom  reflected  on  those 
laws,  and  performed  several  meritorious  actions, 
have  all  of  them  reached  enligrhtenment. 

76.  And  such  beings  as  were  living  patient,  sub- 
dued, and  disciplined,  under  the  rule  of  the  6'inas  of 
those  times,  have  all  of  them  reached  enlighten- 
ment. 

^  Purushottama^^. 
[21]  E 


50  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  II. 


77.  Others  also,  who  paid  worship  to  the  rehcs  of 
the  departed  (9inas,  erected  many  thousands  of 
St{ipas  made  of  gems,  gold,  silver,  or  crystal, 

78.  Or  built  Stupas  of  emerald,  cat's  eye^  pearls, 
egregious  lapis  lazuli,  or  sapphire ;  they  have  all  of 
them  reached  enlightenment. 

79.  And  those  who  erected  Stiipas  from  marble, 
sandal-wood,  or  eagle-wood ;  constructed  Stupas  from 
Deodar  or  a  combination  of  different  sorts  of  timber; 

80.  And  who  in  gladness  of  heart  built  for  the 
G'inas  Stupas  of  bricks  or  clay;  or  caused  mounds  of 
earth  to  be  raised  in  forests  and  wildernesses  in 
dedication  to  the  6^inas ; 

81.  The  little  boys  even,  who  in  playing  erected 
here  and  there  heaps  of  sand  with  the  intention  of 
dedicating  them  as  Stupas  to  the  6^inas,  they  have 
all  of  them  reached  enlightenment. 

82.  Likewise  have  all  who  caused  jewel  images 
to  be  made  and  dedicated,  adorned  with  the  thirty- 
two  characteristic  signs,  reached  enlightenment. 

83.  Others  who  had  images  of  Sugatas  made 
of  the  seven  precious  substances,  of  copper  or 
brass,  have  all  of  them  reached  enlightenment. 

84.  Those  who  ordered  beautiful  statues  of  Su- 
gatas to  be  made  of  lead,  iron,  clay,  or  plaster 
have  &c. 

85.  Those  who  made  images  (of  the  Sugatas)  on 
painted  walls,  with  complete  limbs  and  the  hundred 
holy  signs,  whether  they  drew  them  themselves  or 
had  them  drawn  by  others,  have  &c. 


^  Karketana,  a  certain  precious  stone,  which,  according  to  the 
dictionaries,  is  a  kind  of  cat's  eye.  It  rather  looks  as  if  it  were 
the  Greek  xa^'^^So'i-jor. 


It.  SKILFULNESS.  5 1 

86.  Those  even,  whether  men  or  boys,  who 
during  the  lesson  or  in  play,  by  way  of  amusement, 
made  upon  the  walls  (such)  images  with  the  nail  or 
a  piece  of  wood, 

87.  Have  all  of  them  reached  enlightenment; 
they  have  become  compassionate,  and,  by  rousing 
many  Bodhisattvas,  have  saved  ko/is  of  creatures. 

88.  Those  who  offered  flowers  and  perfumes  to 
the  relics  of  the  Tathagatas,  to  Stiipas,  a  mound  of 
earth,  images  of  clay  or  drawn  on  a  wall ; 

89.  Who  caused  musical  instruments,  drums,  conch 
trumpets,  and  noisy  great  drums  to  be  played,  and 
raised  the  rattle  of  tymbals  at  such  places  in  order 
to  celebrate  the  highest  enlightenment; 

90.  Who  caused  sweet  lutes,  cymbals,  tabors, 
small  drums,  reed-pipes,  flutes  of  —  ^  or  sugar-cane 
to  be  made,  have  all  of  them  reached  enlightenment. 

91.  Those  who  to  celebrate  the  Sugatas  made 
iron  cymbals  resound,  — (?)  or  small  drums  ^;  who 
sang  a  song  sweet  and  lovely ; 

92.  They  have  all  of  them  reached  enlightenment. 
By  paying  various  kinds  of  worship  to  the  relics  of 
the  Sugatas,  by  doing  but  a  little  for  the  relics,  by 
making  resound  were  it  but  a  single  musical  instru- 
ment ; 

93.  Or  by  worshipping  were  it  but  with  a  single 


^  The  MSS.  have  ekonna^a,  which  I  do  not  understand  ;  Bur- 
nouf,  it  would  seem,  has  read  ekotsava,  for  his  translation  has 
'  ceux  qui  ne  servent  que  pour  une  fete.' 

2  Two  words  are  doubtful;  one  MS.  has  ga.\a.ma.mdu\ia.  va — 
mawfi?aka  va;  another  ^alamaddraka  vS  —  maddrakS  va. 
It  is  not  impossible  that  maddraka  is  essentially  the  same  with 
Sanskrit  mandra,  which  is  said  to  be  a  kind  of  drum.  Burnouf 
renders  the  words  by  '  qui  ont  battu  I'eau,  frappd  dans  leurs  mains.' 

E  2 


52  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  IT. 

flower,  by  drawing  on  a  wall  the  images  of  the  Su- 
gatas,  by  doing  worship  were  it  even  with  distracted 
thoughts,  one  shall  in  course  of  time  see  ko/is  of 
Buddhas. 

94.  Those  who,  when  in  presence  of  a  Stupa, 
have  offered  their  reverential  salutation,  be  it  in  a 
complete  form  or  by  merely  joining  the  hands ;  who, 
were  it  but  for  a  single  moment,  bent  their  head  or 
body; 

95.  And  who  at  Stupas  containing  relics  have  one 
single  time  said:  Homage  be  to  Buddha!  albeit  they 
did  it  with  distracted  thoughts,  all  have  attained 
superior  enlightenment. 

96.  The  creatures  who  in  the  days  of  those  Su- 
gatas,  whether  already  extinct  ^  or  still  in  existence, 
have  heard  no  more  than  the  name  of  the  law,  have 
all  of  them  reached  enlightenment. 

97.  Many  ko^'Is  of  future  Buddhas  beyond  imagina- 
tion and  measure  shall  likewise  reveal  this  device  as 
6^inas  and  supreme  Lords. 

98.  Endless  shall  be  the  skilfulness  of  these 
leaders  of  the  world,  by  which  they  shall  educate  ^ 
ko/is  of  beings  to  that  Buddha-knowledge  which  is 
free  from  imperfection  ^. 


^  Or,  expired,  and  more  grandly  entered  Nirva«a.  The  real 
meaning  of  the  contents  of  stanza  74  seq.  will  be  that  all  men 
who  lived  under  past  Sugatas,  i.  e.  in  past  days,  after  doing 
acts  of  piety,  have  finished  with  reaching  enlightenment,  i.  e.  with 
dying. 

^  Vinayati,  to  train,  educate,  also  means  to  carry  away,  remove. 

*  I.e.  death.  Such  terms  as  perfect  enlightenment,  Buddha- 
knowledge,  &c.,  when  they  are  veiled  or  euphemistic  expressions 
for  death,  may  be  compared  with  the  phrase  '  to  see  the  truth,' 
which  in  some  parts  of  Europe  is  quite  common,  especially  among 


II.  SKILFULNESS.  5 


n 


99.  Never  has  there  been  any  being  who,  after 
hearing  the  law  of  those  (leaders),  shall  not  become 
Buddha  \'  for  this  is  the  fixed  vow  of  the  Tatha- 
gatas :  Let  me,  by  accomplishing  my  course  of  duty, 
lead  others  to  enlightenment. 

100.  They  are  to  expound  in  future  days  many 
thousand  ko^is  of  heads  of  the  law ;  in  their  Tatha- 
gataship  they  shall  teach  the  law  by  showing  the 
sole  vehicle  before-mentioned. 

10 1.  The  line  of  the  law  forms  an  unbroken  con- 
tinuity and  the  nature  of  its  properties  is  always 
manifest.  Knowing  this,  the  Buddhas,  the  highest 
of  men,  shall  reveal  this  single  vehicle  2. 

102.  They  shall  reveal  the  stability  of  the  law,  its 
being  subjected  to  fixed  rules,  its  unshakeable  per- 
petuity in  the  world,  the  awaking  of  the  Buddhas  on 
the  elevated  terrace  of  the  earth,  their  skilfulness. 

103.  In  all  directions  of  space  are  standing  Bud- 
dhas, like  sand  of  the  Ganges,  honoured  by  gods 
and  men ;  these  also  do,  for  the  weal  of  all  beings  in 
the  world,  expound  superior  enlightenment. 

104.  Those  Buddhas  while  manifesting  skilfulness 
display  various  vehicles  though,  at  the  same  time, 
indicating  the  one  single  vehicle^:  the  supreme  place 
of  blessed  rest. 


country  people,  as  synonymous  with  dying.  No  less  common  is 
the  expression  nirvawam  pa^yati,  to  see  Nirvawa. 

^  The  text  has  eko  'pi  satvo  na  kada^i  tesha;;,;,  ^'rutvana  dhar- 
maw  na  bhaveta  buddha/^,  -Srutvana  answers,  of  course,  to  a 
Prakrit  sutvana;  cf.Vedic  pitvanam,  Pacini  VII,  i,  48. 

2  Viditva  Buddha  dvipadanam  uttama,  praka^-ayishyanti  'mam 
ekayana;;/.  The  elision  of  i  is  an  example  of  Prakrit  or  Pali 
Sandhi,  frequent  in  the  stanzas. 

^  Yana  here  properly  denotes  way,  or  place  where  one  is 
going  to. 


54  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  IT. 

105.  Acquainted  as  they  are  with  the  conduct  of 
all  mortals,  with  their  peculiar  dispositions  and  pre- 
vious actions;  with  due  regard  to  their  strenuous- 
ness  and  vigour,  as  well  as  their  inclination,  the 
Buddhas  impart  their  lights  to  them. 

106.  By  dint  of  knowledge  the  leaders  produce 
many  illustrations,  arguments,  and  reasons;  and  con- 
sidering how  the  creatures  have  various  inclinations 
they  impart  various  directions. 

107.  And  myself  also,  the  leader  of  the  chief 
6^inas,  am  now  manifesting,  for  the  weal  of  creatures 
now  living,  this  Buddha  enlightenment  by  thousands 
of  ko/is  of  various  directions. 

108.  I  reveal  the  law  in  its  multifariousness  with 
regard  to  the  inclinations  and  dispositions  of  creatures. 
I  use  different  means  to  rouse  each  according  to  his 
own  character.    Such  is  the  might  of  my  knowledge. 

109.  I  likewise  see  the  poor  wretches,  deficient  in 
wisdom  and  conduct,  lapsed  into  the  mundane  whirl, 
retained  in  dismal  places,  plunged  in  affliction  inces- 
santly renewed. 

no.  Fettered  as  they  are  by  desire  like  the  yak 
by  its  tail,  continually  blinded  by  sensual  pleasure, 
they  do  not  seek  the  Buddha,  the  mighty  one ;  they 
do  not  seek  the  law  that  leads  to  the  end  of  pain. 

111.  Staying  in  the  six  states  of  existence,  they 
are  benumbed  in  their  senses,  stick  unmoved  to 
the  low  views,  and  suffer  pain  on  pain.  For  those  I 
feel  a  great  compassion. 

112.  On  the  terrace  of  enlightenment  I  have 
remained  three  weeks  in  full,  searching  and  pon- 
dering on  such  a  matter,  steadily  looking  up  to  the 
tree  there  (standing). 

1 1 3.  Keeping  in  view  that  king  of  trees  with  an 


II.  SKILFULNESS.  55 

unwaverine  Sfaze  I  walked  round  at  its  foot  ^ 
(thinking) :  This  law  is  wonderful  and  lofty,  whereas 
creatures  are  blind  with  dulness  and  ignorance. 

114.  Then  it  was  that  Brahma  entreated  me,  and 
so  did  Indra,  the  four  rulers  of  the  cardinal  points, 
Mahe^vara,  l^vara,  and  the  hosts  of  Maruts  by  thou- 
sands of  ko/is^. 

115.  All  stood  with  joined  hands  and  respectful, 
while  myself  was  revolving  the  matter  in  my  mind 
(and  thought)  :  What  shall  I  do  ?  At  the  very  time 
that  I  am  uttering  syllables  ^  beings  are  oppressed 
with  evils. 

116.  In  their  ignorance  they  will  not  heed  the 
law  I  announce,  and  in  consequence  of  it  they  will 
incur  some  penalty.  It  would  be  better  were  I  never 
to  speak.  May  my  quiet  extinction  take  place  this 
very  day ! 

117.  But  on  remembering  the  former  Buddhas 
and  their  skilfulness,  (I  thought):  Nay,  I  also  will 
manifest  this  tripartite  Buddha-enlightenment. 

118.  When  I  was  thus  meditating  on  the  law,  the 
other  Buddhas  in  all  the  directions  of  space  appeared 
to  me  in  their  own  body  and  raised  their  voice,  crying 
'  Amen. 

119.  'Amen,  Solitary,  first  Leader  of  the  world  ! 
now  that  thou  hast  come  to  unsurpassed  knowledge. 


^  Tasyaiva  heshZ/ze,  i.e.  Prakrit  he/Me,  Sanskrit  adhastat. 

2  The  story  slightly  differs  from  what  is  found  in  the  Mahavagga, 
Lalita-vistara,  and  other  works,  in  so  far  as  the  number  of  weeks 
is  generally  reckoned  as  seven.  There  are,  however,  other  discre- 
pancies between  the  relations  in  the  various  sources,  for  which 
I  must  refer  to  Mahavagga  I,  5  ;  Lalita-vistara,  p.  51 1 ;  cf  Bigandet, 
Legend,  p.  112. 

^  The  text  has  varwan,  i.e.  colours,  letters. 


5^  SADDHARMA-PUiVZlARiKA.  II. 


and  art  meditating  on  the  skilfulness  of  the  leaders 
of  the  world,  thou  repeatest  their  teaching. 

1 20.  'We  also,  being  Buddhas,  will  make  clear  the 
highest  word\  divided  into  three  parts;  for  men 
(occasionally)  have  low  inclinations,  and  might  per- 
chance from  ignorance  not  believe  (us,  when  we  say), 
Ye  shall  become  Buddhas. 

121.  'Hence  we  will  rouse  many  Bodhisattvas  by 
the  display  of  skilfulness  and  the  encouraging  of  the 
wish  of  obtaining  fruits.' 

122.  And  I  was  delighted  to  hear  the  sweet  voice 
of  the  leaders  of  men  ;  in  the  exultation  of  my  heart 
I  said  to  the  blessed  saints,  '  The  words  of  the 
eminent  sages  are  not  spoken  in  vain. 

123.  'I,  too,  will  act  according  to  the  indications 
of  the  wise  leaders  of  the  world  ;  having  myself  been 
born  in  the  midst  of  the  degradation  of  creatures,  I 
have  known  agitation  in  this  dreadful  world.' 

124.  When  I  had  come  to  that  conviction,  O  son 
of  6ari,  I  instantly  went  to  Benares,  where  I  skilfully 
preached  the  law  to  the  five  Solitaries  ^  that  law 
which  is  the  base  of  final  beatitude. 

125.  From  that  moment  the  wheel  of  my  law  has 
been  moving^  and  the  name  of  Nirva;/a  made  its 
appearance  in  the  world,  as  well  as  the  name  of 
Arhat,  of  Dharma,  and  Saneha. 

126.  Many  years  have  I  preached  and  pointed  to  the 


^  Properly,  the  most  lofty  place;  the  word  pada  in  the  text 
means  place,  spot,  word,  subject,  &c. 

^  A^«ata-Kau;/f/inya  and  the  four  others  mentioned  in  the  open- 
ing chapter. 

^  In  chap.  VII  we  shall  see  that  the  wheel  was  put  in  motion  at 
an  inconceivably  long  period  before,  by  the  Tathagata  Maha- 
bhi^Tlag'Manabhibhu. 


II.  SKILFULNESS.  5  7 

Stage  of  Nirvana,  the  end  of  wretchedness  and 
mundane  existence.  Thus  I  used  to  speak  at  all 
times. 

127.  And  when  I  saw,  ^'ariputra,  the  children  of 
the  highest  of  men  by  many  thousands  of  ko/is, 
numberless,  striving  after  the  supreme,  the  highest 
enlightenment ; 

128.  And  when  such  as  had  heard  the  law  of  the 
Chinas,  owing  to  the  many-sidedness  of  (their)  skilful- 
ness,  had  approached  me  and  stood  before  my  face, 
all  of  them  with  joined  hands,  and  respectful  ; 

129.  Then  I  conceived  the  idea  that  the  time  had 
come  for  me  to  announce  the  excellent  law  and  to 
reveal  supreme  enlightenment,  for  which  task  I  had 
been  born  in  the  world. 

I  T)0.  This  (event)  to-day  will  be  hard  to  be  under- 
stood by  the  ignorant  who  imagine  they  see^  here 
a  sign,  as  they  are  proud  and  dull.  But  the  Bodhi- 
sattvas,  they  will  listen  to  me. 

131.  And  I  felt  free  from  hesitation  and  highly 
cheered  ;  putting  aside  all  timidity,  I  began  speaking 
in  the  assembly  of  the  sons  of  Sugata,  and  roused 
them  to  enlightenment. 

132.  On  beholding  such  worthy  sons  of  Buddha 
(I  said) :  Thy  doubts  also  will  be  removed,  and  these 
twelve  hundred  (disciples)  of  mine,  free  from  imper- 
fections, will  all  of  them  become  Buddhas. 

133.  Even  as  the  nature  of  the  law  of  the  former^ 
mighty  saints  and  the  future  6^inas  is,  so  is  my  law 

^  One  would  rather  expect  Svho  imagine  not  to  see,  fail  to  see,' 
but  the  words  of  the  text  do  not  admit  of  such  an  interpretation. 

"  Yathaiva  tesha?;z  purimawa  Tayinam,  anagatana/«  ^a  (rinana 
dharmata,  mamapi  esha  vikalpavar^ita,  tathaiva  'haw  dejayi  adya 
tubhyazw. 


58  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  II. 

free  from  any  doubtfulness,  and  it  is  such  as  I  to-day 
preach  it  to  thee. 

134.  At  certain  times,  at  certain  places,  somehow 
do  the  leaders  appear  in  the  world,  and  after  their 
appearance  will  they,  whose  view  is  boundless,  at 
one  time  or  another  preach^  a  similar  law. 

135.  It  is  most  difficult  to  meet  with  this  superior 
law,  even  in  myriads  of  ko/is  of  JEons ;  very  rare 
are  the  beings  who  will  adhere  to  the  superior  law 
which  they  have  heard  from  me. 

136.  Just  as  the  blossom  of  the  glomerous  fig- 
tree  is  rare,  albeit  sometimes,  at  some  places,  and 
somehow  it  is  met  with,  as  something  pleasant  to  see 
for  everybody,  as  a  wonder  to  the  world  including 
the  gods ; 

137.  (So  wonderful)  and  far  more  wonderful  is  the 
law  I  proclaim.  Any  one  who,  on  hearing  a  good 
exposition  of  it,  shall  cheerfully  accept  it  and  recite  but 
one  word  of  it,  will  have  done  honour  to  all  Buddhas. 

138.  Give  up  all  doubt  and  uncertainty  in  this 
respect;  I  declare  that  I  am  the  king  of  the  law 
(Dharmara^a) ;  I  am  urging  others  to  enlighten- 
ment, but  I  am  here  without  disciples. 

1 39.  Let  this  mystery  be  for  thee,  .S'ariputra,  for  all 
disciples  of  mine,  and  for  the  eminent  Bodhisattvas, 
who  are  to  keep  this  mystery. 

140.  For  the  creatures,  when  at  the  period  of  the 
five  depravities-,  are  vile  and  bad ;  they  are  blinded 

^  Desa-yuh,  plural;  Burnouf  seems  to  have  read  the  singular. 

^  The  five  kashayas  are  summarily  indicated  in  Dhammapada 
115  by  'ragadi.'  As  the  list  of  kle^as,  Lalita-vistara,  p.  348  seq., 
commences  with  raga,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  Burnouf  was 
right  in  supposing  the  five  kashayas  to  be  synonymous  with  the 
corresponding  number  of  kle^as.  The  items  of  the  list  are 
variously  given. 


II.  SKILFULNESS.  59 

by  sensual  desires,  the  fools,  and  never  turn  their 
minds  to  enlightenment. 

141.  (Some)  beings,  having  heard  this  one  and 
sole  vehicle^  manifested  by  the  6^ina,  will  in  days  to 
come  swerve  from  it,  reject  the  Sutra,  and  go  down 
to  hell. 

142.  But  those  beings  who  shall  be  modest  and 
pure,  striving  after  the  supreme  and  the  highest 
enlightenment,  to  them  shall  I  unhesitatingly  set 
forth  the  endless  forms  of  this  one  and  sole  vehicle. 

143.  Such  is  the  mastership  of  the  leaders;  that 
is,  their  skilfulness.  They  have  spoken  in  many 
mysteries  ^ ;  hence  it  is  difficult  to  understand 
(them). 

144.  Therefore  try  to  understand  the  mystery^  of 
the  Buddhas,  the  holy  masters  of  the  world ;  for- 
sake all  doubt  and  uncertainty  :  you  shall  become 
Buddhas ;  rejoice  ! 

^  Or,  rather,  learnt  this  way. 

^  The  word  in  the  text  is  sandhava/^anai>^,  evidently  synony- 
mous with  sandhabhashya. 

^  Sandha,  by  Burnouf  rendered  'langage  ^nigmatique.'  On 
comparing  the  different  meanings  of  sandha  and  sandhaya,  both 
in  Sanskrit  and  in  Pali,  I  am  led  to  suppose  that  sandha-  (and 
sandhaya-)  bhashita  (bhashya)  was  a  term  used  in  the  sense 
of  '  speaking  (speech)  in  council,  a  counsel,'  scarcely  differing  from 
mantra.  In  both  words  secrecy  is  implied,  though  not  expressed. 
If  we  take  the  term  as  synonymous  with  mantra,  the  connection 
between  upayakaujalya,  diplomacy,  skilfulness,  and  sandha- 
bhashita  is  clear.  Cf.  the  Gothic  word  run  a,  both  IBovXtj  and 
fiv(TTr)piov ;  garuni,  avu^ovkiov.  The  theistical  sect  have  taken 
it  in  the  sense  of  '  God's  counsel,'  but  I  cannot  produce  a  warrant 
for  this  guess.  By  Hiouen  Thsang,  the  term  sandhaya  is  trans- 
lated by  'in  a  hidden  sense,'  as  we  know  from  Professor  Max 
Miiller's  note,  in  his  edition  of  the  Va^'ray^/^/^edika,  p.  23. 


6o  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARiKA.  HI. 


CHAPTER   III. 


A    PARABLE. 


Then  the  venerable  ^'arlputra,  pleased,  glad, 
charmed,  cheerful,  thrilling  with  delight  and  joy, 
stretched  his  joined  hands  towards  the  Lord,  and, 
looking  up  to  the  Lord  with  a  steady  gaze,  ad- 
dressed him  in  this  strain  :  I  am  astonished,  amazed, 
O  Lord  !  I  am  in  ecstasy  to  hear  such  a  call  from  the 
Lord.  For  when,  before  I  had  heard  of  this  law 
from  the  Lord,  I  saw  other  Bodhisattvas,  and  heard 
that  the  Bodhisattvas  would  in  future  get  the  name 
of  Buddhas,  I  felt  extremely  sorry,  extremely  vexed 
to  be  deprived  from  so  grand  a  sight  as  the  Tatha- 
gata-knowledge.  And  whenever,  O  Lord,  for  my 
daily  recreation  I  was  visiting  the  caves  of  rocks  or 
mountains,  wood  thickets,  lovely  gardens,  rivers,  and 
roots  of  trees,  I  always  was  occupied  with  the  same 
and  ever-recurring  thought :  *  Whereas  the  entrance 
into  the  fixed  points^  of  the  law  is  nominally-  equal, 
we  have  been  dismissed  by  the  Lord  with  the  inferior 
vehicle.'     Instantly,  however,  O  Lord,  I  felt  that  it 


^  Or,  elements. 

2  Tulye  nama  dharmadhatuprave^e  vayaw — niryatita^. 
The  terms  are  ambiguous,  and  open  to  various  interpretations. 
The  Tibetan  version  has,  according  to  Burnouf, '  in  an  equal  intro- 
duction to  the  domain  of  the  law,'  from  which  at  least  thus  much 
results,  that  the  text  had  tulye,  not  tulya,  as  Burnouf  reads. 
Tulye  prave.ye  I  take  to  be  a  so-called  absolute  locative  case. 
As  to  the  plural  '  we,'  it  refers  to  ^Sariputra. 


III.  A    PARABLE.  6 1 


was  our  own   fault,   not  the   Lord's.     For  had  we 
regarded  the  Lord  at  the  time  of  his  giving  the  all- 
surpassing   demonstration  of  the  law,   that   is,  the 
exposition  of  supreme,  perfect  enlightenment,  then, 
O  Lord,  we   should   have   become  adepts   in  those 
laws.       But    because,    without    understanding    the 
mystery   of  the   Lord,   we,  at  the   moment   of  the 
Bodhisattvas  not  being  assembled,  heard  only  in  a 
hurry,    caught,    meditated,    minded,    took    to    heart 
the  first  lessons  pronounced  on  the  law,  therefore, 
O   Lord,    I    used    to    pass    day  and  night   in   self- 
reproach.     (But)  to-day,   O   Lord,   I   have  reached 
complete  extinction ;  to-day,  O  Lord,  I  have  become 
calm ;  to-day,  O  Lord,   I  am  wholly  come  to   rest  ; 
to-day,  O  Lord,  I  have  reached  Arhatship ;  to-day, 
O  Lord,  I  am  the  Lord's  eldest  son,  born  from  his 
law,  sprung  into  existence  by  the  law,  made  by  the 
law,  inheriting  from  the  law,  accomplished  by  the  law. 
My  burning  has  left  me,  O  Lord,  now  that  I  have 
heard  this  wonderful  law,  which  I  had  not  learnt 
before,  announced  by  the  voice  from  the  mouth  of 
the  Lord. 

And  on  that  occasion  the  venerable  ^'ariputra 
addressed  the  Lord  in  the  following  stanzas : 

1.  I  am  astonished,  great  Leader,  I  am  charmed 
to  hear  this  voice ;  I  feel  no  doubt  any  more ;  now 
am  I  fully  ripe  for  the  superior  vehicle. 

2.  Wonderful  is  the  voice  ^  of  the  Sugatas ;  it 
dispels  the  doubt  and  pain  of  living  beings ;  my 
pain  also  is  all  gone  now  that  I,  freed  from  imper- 
fections, have  heard  that  voice  (or,  call). 

3.  When  I  was  taking  my  daily  recreation  or  was 

^  Rather,  call. 


62  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARfKA.  III. 

walking  in  woody  thickets,  when  betaking  myself  to 
the  roots  of  trees  or  to  mountain  caves,  I  indulged 
in  no  other  thought  but  this  : 

4.  '  O  how  am  I  deluded  by  vain  thoughts ! 
whereas  the  faultless  laws  are,  nominally,  equal, 
shall  I  in  future  not  preach  the  superior  law  in  the 
world  ? 

5.  'The  thirty-two  characteristic  signs  have  failed 
me,  and  the  gold  colour  of  the  skin  has  vanished ; 
all  the  (ten)  powers  and  emancipations  have  likewise 
been  lost.  O  how  have  I  gone  astray  at  the  equal 
laws ! 

6.  '  The  secondary  signs  also  of  the  great  Seers, 
the  eighty  excellent  specific  signs,  and  the  eighteen 
uncommon  properties  have  failed  me.  O  how  am 
I  deluded!' 

7.  And  when  I  had  perceived  thee,  so  benign  and 
merciful  to  the  world,  and  was  lonely  walking  to  take 
my  daily  recreation,  I  thought:  '  I  am  excluded  from 
that  inconceivable,  unbounded  knowledge  ! ' 

8.  Days  and  nights,  O  Lord,  I  passed  always 
thinking  of  the  same  subject ;  I  would  ask  the  Lord 
whether  I  had  lost  my  rank  or  not. 

9.  In  such  reflections,  O  Chief  of  Ginas,  I  con- 
stantly passed  my  days  and  nights ;  and  on  seeing 
many  other  Bodhisattvas  praised  by  the  Leader  of 
the  world, 

10.  And  on  hearing  this  Buddha-law,  I  thought: 
'To  be  sure,  this  is  expounded  mysteriously^;  it  is 
an  inscrutable,  subtle,  and  faultless  science,  which 
is  announced  by  the  6^inas  on  the  terrace  of  en- 
lightenment.' 

■^  Sandhaya;  the  Chinese  translation  by  Kumara-§-iva,  accord- 
ing to  Stan.  Julien's  version,  has  '  suivant  la  convenance.' 


III.  A    PARABLE.  6^ 

1 1.  Formerly  I  was  attached  to  (heretical)  theories, 
being  a  wandering  monk  and  in  high  honour  (or,  of 
the  same  opinions)  with  the  heretics  ^ ;  afterwards 
has  the  Lord,  regarding  my  disposition,  taught  me 
Nirva;^a,  to  detach  me  from  perverted  views. 

12.  After  having  completely  freed  myself  from 
all  (heretical)  views  and  reached  the  laws  of  void, 
(I  conceive)  that  I  have  become  extinct;  yet  this  is 
not  deemed  to  be  extinction. 

13.  But  when  one  becomes  Buddha,  a  superior 
being,  honoured  by  men,  gods,  goblins.  Titans,  and 
adorned  with  the  thirty-two  characteristic  signs,  then 
one  will  be  completely  extinct. 

14.  All  those  (former)  cares^  have  now  been  dis- 
pelled, since  I  have  heard  the  voice.  Now  am  I 
extinct,  as  thou  announcest  my  destination  (to  Nir- 
v^ns.)  before  the  world  including  the  gods. 

15.  When  I  first  heard  the  voice  of  the  Lord,  I 
had  a  great  terror  lest  it  might  be  Mara,  the  evil 
one,  who  on  this  occasion  had  adopted  the  disguise 
of  Buddha, 

16.  But  when  the  unsurpassed  Buddha-wisdom 
had  been  displayed  in   and  established  with   argu- 


^  Parivra^akas  Tirthikasammatai-  ka,.  The  term  pari- 
vra^aka  or  parivra^  is  occasionally  applied  to  Buddhist  monks, 
but  here  it  would  seem  that  the  Brahmanistic  monks  are  meant, 
the  brahmasa»2Sthas  of  ^ahkara  in  his  commentary  on  Brahma- 
Sutra  III,  4,  20.    They  are  to  be  distinguished  from  the  Tirthika's. 

^  Or,  thoughts  ;  one  MS.  has  vyapanita  sarvani  'mi  (read 
°m  'mi)  manyitani;  another  reads,  vy.  sarvawi  'mi  ma-^/^itani. 
Manyita  is  a  participle  derived  from  the  present  tense  of  manyate, 
to  mean,  to  mind,  in  the  manner  of^ahita  from^ahati.  Ma/('/('i- 
tani  is  hardly  correct ;  it  is,  however,  just  possible  that  it  is  intended 
to  stand  for  ma/^-/^ittani. 


64  SADDHARMA-PUiVJDARIKA.  III. 

ments,  reasons,  and  illustrations,  by  myriads  of  ko/'is, 
then  I  lost  all  doubt  about  the  law  I  heard. 

1 7.  And  when  thou  hadst  mentioned  to  me  ^  the 
thousands  of  ko/is  of  Buddhas,  the  past  6^inas  who 
have  come  to  final  rest,  and  how  they  preached  this 
law  by  firmly  establishing  it  through  skilfulness ; 

18.  How  the  many  future  Buddhas  and  those  who 
are  now  existing,  as  knowers  of  the  real  truth,  shall 
expound  or  are  expounding  this  law  by  hundreds  of 
able  devices ; 

19.  And  when  thou  wert  mentioning  thine  own 
course  after  leaving  home,  how  the  idea  of  the  wheel 
of  the  law  presented  itself  to  thy  mind  and  how  thou 
decidedst  upon  preaching  the  law  ; 

20.  Then  I  was  convinced  :  This  is  not  Mara ;  it 
Is  the  Lord  of  the  world,  who  has  shown  the  true 
course  ;  no  Maras  can  here  abide.  So  then  my 
mind  (for  a  moment)  was  overcome  with  perplexity  ; 

21.  But  when  the  sweet,  deep,  and  lovely  voice  of 
Buddha  gladdened  me,  all  doubts  were  scattered,  my 
perplexity  vanished,  and  I  stood  firm  in  knowledge. 

22.  I  shall  become  a  Tathagata,  undoubtedly, 
worshipped  in  the  world  including  the  gods ;  I  shall 
manifest  Buddha -wisdom,  mysteriously  ^  rousing 
many  Bodhisattvas. 

After  this  speech  of  the  venerable  vSariputra,  the 
Lord  said  to  him  :  I  declare  to  thee,  ^'ariputra,  I 
announce  to  thee,  in  presence  of  this  world  including 
the  gods,  Maras,  and  Brahmas,  in  presence  of  this 

^  Yada  /fa  me  Buddhasahasrako/}'a/^,  kirteshy  (var.  lect.  kirtishy) 
atitan  parinirvr/'tazw  6^inan.     Kirteshi  is  Sanskrit  a^ikirtas, 

^  Sandhaya.  Burnouf's  rendering  'aux  creatures'  points  to 
satvaya,  which  is  nothing  but  a  misread  sandhaya.  Cf.  stanza 
37,  below. 


TIL  A    PARABLE.  65 

people,  including  ascetics  and  Brahmans,  that  thou, 
^'ariputra,  hast  been  by  me  made  ripe  for  supreme, 
perfect  enlightenment,  in  presence  of  twenty  hundred 
thousand  myriads  of  ko/is  of  Buddhas,  and  that  thou, 
^Sariputra,  hast  for  a  long  time  followed  my  com- 
mandments. Thou,  ^'ariputra,  art,  by  the  counsel  of 
the  Bodhisattva,  by  the  decree  of  the  Bodhisattva, 
reborn  here  under  my  rule.  Owing  to  the  mighty 
will  of  the  Bodhisattva  thou,  ^'ariputra,  hast  no 
recollection  of  thy  former  vow  to  observe  the  (reli- 
gious) course  ;  of  the  counsel  of  the  Bodhisattva,  the 
decree  of  the  Bodhisattva.  Thou  thinkest  that  thou 
hast  reached  final  rest.  I,  wishing  to  revive  and 
renew  in  thee  the  knowledge  of  thy  former  vow  to 
observe  the  (religious)  course,  will  reveal  to  the 
disciples  the  Dharmaparyaya  called  '  the  Lotus  of 
the  True  Law,'  this  Sutranta,  &c. 

Again,  K^ariputra,  at  a  future  period,  after  innu- 
merable, inconceivable,  immeasurable  ^ons,  when 
thou  shalt  have  learnt  the  true  law  of  hundred 
thousand  myriads  of  ko^'is  of  Tathagatas,  showed 
devotion  in  various  ways,  and  achieved  the  present 
Bodhisattva-course,  thou  shalt  become  in  the  world 
a  Tathagata,  &c.,  named  Padmaprabha\  endowed 
with  science  and  conduct,  a  Sugata,  a  knower  of  the 
world,  an  unsurpassed  tamer  of  men,  a  master  of 
gods  and  men  2,  a  Lord  Buddha. 

^  Padma,  Nelumbium  Speciosum,  having  a  rosy  hue,  we  must 
infer  that  6'ariputra  will  be  reborn  at  twilight. 

^  The  supreme  tamer  of  men  is,  in  reality,  Yama,  personified 
Twilight,  and  as  evening  twilight  the  god  of  death  and  the  ruler 
of  the  infernal  regions.  The  word  yama  itself  means  both 
'twin'  (of.  twi-light)  and  'tamer.'  Owing  to  the  fact  that  in 
mythology  many  beings  are  denoted  by  the  name  of '  the'  twins,' 
e.  g.  morning  and  evening,  the  A^vins,  Castor  and  Pollux,  it  is  often 
[21]  F 


66  SADDHARMA-PUA'DARIKA.  III. 

At  that  time  then,  ^'ariputra,  the  Buddha-field  of 
that  Lord,  the  Tathagata  Padmaprabha,  to  be  called 
Vlra^,  will  be  level,  pleasant,  delightful,  extremely 
beautiful  to  see,  pure,  prosperous,  rich,  quiet,  abound- 
ing with  food,  replete  with  many  races  of  men^;  it 
will  consist  of  lapis  lazuli,  and  contain  a  checker-board 
of  eight  compartments  distinguished  by  gold  threads, 
each  compartment  having  its  jewel  tree  always  and 
perpetually  filled  with  blossoms  and  fruits  of  seven 
precious  substances. 

Now  that  Tathagata  Padmaprabha,  &c.,  ^ariputra, 
will  preach  the  law  by  the  instrumentality  of  three 
vehicles^.  Further,  ^'ariputra,  that  Tathagata  will 
not  appear  at  the  decay  of  the  ^on,  but  preach  the 
law  by  virtue  of  a  vow. 

That  JEon,  ^'ariputra,  will  be  named  Maharatna- 
pratima7?rt'ita  (i.  e.  ornamented  with  magnificent 
jewels).  Knowest  thou,  6'ariputra,  why  that  .^on 
is  named  Maharatnapratima/^rt'ita  ?  The  Bodhisat- 
tvas  of  a  Buddha-field,  ^ariputra,  are  called  ratnas 
(jewels),  and  at  that  time  there  will  be  many  Bodhi- 
sattvas  in  that  sphere  (called)  Virata ;  innumerable, 
incalculable,  beyond  computation,  abstraction  made 
from  their  being  computed  by  the  Tathagatas.  On 
that  account  is  that  y^on  called  Maharatnaprati- 
ma;/^ita. 

Now,   to  proceed,   ^'ariputra,   at   that  period  the 


difficult  to  make  out  which  pair  of  twins  is  meant  in  any  particular 
case.  The  sun  himself  appears  in  the  function  of  Yama,  because 
it  is  he  who  makes  twilight, 

'  One  MS.  reads  bahu^anamanushyakirwa,  the  other  bahu- 
^anamaruprakir«a. 

^  Cf.  the  threefold  vehicle,  trivr/t  rat  ha,  of  the  Ajvins,  Rig- 
vedal,  34,  9.  12,  47,  2. 


III.  A    PARABLE.  67 

Bodhisattvas  of  that  field  will  in  walking  step  on 
jewel  lotuses  \  And  these  Bodhisattvas  will  not  be 
plying  their  work  for  the  first  time,  they  having 
accumulated  roots  of  goodness  and  observed  the 
course  of  duty  under  many  hundred  thousand 
Buddhas  ;  they  are  praised  by  the  Tathagatas  for 
their  zealous  application  to  Buddha-knowledge;  are 
perfectioned  in  the  rites  preparatory  to  transcendent 
knowledge  ;  accomplished  in  the  direction  of  all  true 
laws ;  mild,  thoughtful.  Generally,  ^'ariputra,  will 
that  Buddha-region  teem  with  such  Bodhisattvas. 

As  to  the  lifetime,  .5'ariputra,  of  that  Tathagata 
Padmaprabha,  it  will  last  twelve  intermediate  kalpas, 
if  we  leave  out  of  account  the  time  of  his  being  a 
young  prince.  And  the  lifetime  of  the  creatures 
then  living  will  measure  eight  intermediate  kalpas. 
At  the  expiration  of  twelve  intermediate  kalpas, 
.S"ariputra,  the  Tathagata  Padmaprabha,  after  an- 
nouncing the  future  destiny  of  the  Bodhisattva  called 
Dhmipariptir/^a^  to  superior  perfect  enlightenment, 
is  to  enter  complete  Nirva;^a.  'This  Bodhisattva 
Mahasattva  Dhmiparipur/^a,  O  monks,  shall  imme- 
diately after  me  come  to  supreme,  perfect  enlighten- 
ment. He  shall  become  in  the  world  a  Tathagata 
named  Padmavr/shabhavikramin,  an  Arhat,  &c., 
endowed  with  science  and  conduct,  &c.  &c.' 

Now  the  Tathagata  Padmavr/shabhavikramin, 
KS'ariputra,  will  have  a  Buddha-field  of  quite  the 
same  description.  The  true  law,  ^Sariputra,  of  that 
Tathagata  Padmavr/shabhavikramin  will,  after  his 

^  We  may  express  the  same  idea  thus  :  roses  are  sprmging  up 
under  their  feet  at  every  step. 

^  Dhr/ti,  perseverance,  endurance.  Dhr/tiparipur/za  is,  full 
of  perseverance  or  endurance. 

F    2 


68  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  III. 

extinction,  last  thirty-two  intermediate  kalpas,  and 
the  counterfeit  of  his  true  law  will  last  as  many 
intermediate  kalpas  \ 

And  on  that  occasion  the  Lord  uttered  the  follow- 
ing stanzas  : 

23.  Thou  also,  son  of  ^^ari,  shalt  in  future  be  a 
G'lna.,  a  Tathagata  named  Padmaprabha,  of  illimited 
sight ;  thou  shalt  educate  thousands  of  ko/is  of  living 
beings^. 

24.  After  paying  honour  to  many  ko/is  of  Buddhas, 
making^  strenuous  efforts  in  the  course  of  duty,  and 
after  having  produced  in  thyself  the  ten  powers,  thou 
shalt  reach  supreme,  perfect  enlightenment. 

25.  Within  a  period  inconceivable  and  immense 
there  shall  be  an  ^on  rich  in  jewels  (or,  the  ^on 
jewel-rich),  and  a  sphere  named  Virata,  the  pure 
field  of  the  highest  of  men ; 

26.  And  its  ground  will  consist  of  lapis  lazuli,  and 
be  set  off  with  gold  threads ;  it  will  have  hundreds 
of  jewel  trees,  very  beautiful,  and  covered  with 
blossoms  and  fruits, 

27.  Bodhisattvas  of  good  memory,  able  in  showing 


^  This  counterfeit,  pratirupaka,  of  the  true  law,  reminds  one 
of  the  counterfeit,  paitiyaro,  produced  by  Ariman  in  opposition 
to  the  creation  of  Ormazd ;  mythologically  it  is  the  dark  side  of 
nature.  That  there  is  some  connection  between  the  Buddhistical 
pratirfipaka  and  the  Iranian  paitiyaro  can  hardly  be  doubted. 

^  A  striking  example  of  how  the  original  Prakrit  of  the  verse  has 
been  adulterated  in  order  to  give  it  a  more  Sanskrit  colouring  is 
afforded  by  this  stanza.  One  MS.  has  bhavishyasJ  Sarisuta 
tuhawipi;  another  bhavishyase  Sarisutanukampi,  with  mar- 
ginal correction  tvayampi. 

^  Upadayitva,  i.e.  Pali  upadiyitva,  synonymous  with  ara- 
bhya(viryam) ;  the  van  lect.  upar^ayitva,  having  acquired,  is  an 
innovation,  at  fust  sight  specious  enough. 


III.  A    PARABLE.  69 

the  course  of  duty  which  they  have  been  taught 
under  hundreds  of  Buddhas,  will  come  to  be  born 
in  that  field. 

28.  And  the  afore-mentioned  6^ina,  then  in  his  last 
bodily  existence,  shall,  after  passing  the  state  of 
prince  royal,  renounce  sensual  pleasures,  leave  home 
(to  become  a  wandering  ascetic),  and  thereafter  reach 
the  supreme  and  the  highest  enlightenment. 

29.  The  lifetime  of  that  6^ina  will  be  precisely 
twelve  intermediate  kalpas,  and  the  life  of  men  will 
then  last  eight  intermediate  kalpas. 

30.  After  the  extinction  of  the  Tathagata  the  true 
law  will  continue  thirty-two  yEons  in  full,  for  the 
benefit  of  the  world,  including  the  gods. 

31.  When  the  true  law  shall  have  come  to  an  end, 
its  counterfeit  will  stand  for  thirty-two  intermediate 
kalpas.  The  dispersed  relics  of  the  holy  one  will 
always  be  honoured  by  men  and  gods. 

32.  Such  will  be  the  fate  of  that  Lord.  Rejoice, 
O  son  of  ^ari,  for  it  is  thou  who  shalt  be  that  most 
excellent  of  men,  so  unsurpassed. 

The  four  classes  of  the  audience,  monks,  nuns, 
lay  devotees  male  and  female,  gods,  Nagas,  goblins, 
Gandharvas,  demons,  Garu^^as,  Kinnaras,  great  ser- 
pents, men  and  beings  not  human,  on  hearing  the 
announcement  of  the  venerable  ^Sariputra's  destiny 
to  supreme,  perfect  enlightenment,  were  so  pleased, 
glad,  charmed,  thrilling  with  delight  and  joy,  that 
they  covered  the  Lord  severally  with  their  own 
robes,  while  Indra  the  chief  of  gods,  Brahma  Saham- 
pati,  besides  hundred  thousands  of  ko/is  of  other 
divine  beings,  covered  him  with  heavenly  garments 
and  bestrewed  him  with  flowers  of  heaven,  Manda- 
ravas   and   great   Mandaravas.       High    aloft    they 


70  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  III. 

whirled  celestial  clothes  and  struck  hundred  thou- 
sands of  celestial  musical  instruments  and  cymbals, 
high  in  the  sky ;  and  after  pouring  a  great  rain  of 
flowers  they  uttered  these  words  :  The  wheel  of  the 
law  has  been  put  in  motion  by  the  Lord,  the  first 
time  at  Benares  at  7?/shipatana  in  the  Deer-park ; 
to-day  has  the  Lord  again  put  in  motion  the  supreme 
wheel  of  the  law. 

And  on  that  occasion  those  divine  beings  uttered 
the  following  stanzas : 

33.  The  wheel  of  the  law  was  put  in  motion  by 
thee,  O  thou  that  art  unrivalled  in  the  world,  at 
Benares,  O  great  hero !  (that  wheel  which  is  the 
rotation  of)  the  rise  and  decay  of  all  aggregates. 

34.  There  it  was  put  in  motion  for  the  first  time  ; 
now,  a  second  time,  is  it  turned  here,  O  Lord.  To- 
day, O  Master,  thou  hast  preached  this  law,  which  is 
hard  to  be  received  with  faith  \ 

35.  Many  laws  have  we  heard  near  the  Lord  of 
the  world,  but  never  before  did  we  hear  a  law  like 
this. 

36.  We  receive  with  gratitude,  O  great  hero,  the 
mysterious   speech  of  the  great  Sages,  such  as  this 

A 

prediction  regarding  the  self-possessed  Arya  6'ari- 
putra. 

37.  May  we  also  become  such  incomparable 
Buddhas  in  the  world,  who  by  mysterious  speech 
announce  supreme  Buddha-enlightenment. 

38.  May  we  also,  by  the  good  we  have  done  in 
this  world    and    in    the    next,    and   by  our   having 

^  Du^jTaddheyo  yas  te 'ya^,  var.  lect.  du/^j-raddheyo  yan 
tesham.  It  may  be  remarked  that  jraddha  not  only  means  faith, 
belief,  but  also  liking,  approval.  Cf.  the  passage  in  Mahavagga  I, 
5,  2  sq. ;  the  verses  in  Lalita-vistara,  p.  515. 


in.  A    PARABLE.  7 I 

propitiated  the  Buddha,  be  allowed  to  make  a  vow 
for  Biiddhaship. 

Thereupon  the  venerable  ^'ariputra  thus  spoke 
to  the  Lord :  My  doubt  is  gone,  O  Lord,  my  un- 
certainty is  at  an  end  on  hearing  from  the  mouth 
of  the  Lord  my  destiny  to  supreme  enlightenment. 
But  these  twelve  hundred  self-controlled  (disciples), 
O  Lord,  who  have  been  placed  by  thee  on  the  stage 
of  ^'aikshas^  have  been  thus  admonished  and  in- 
structed :  '  My  preaching  of  the  law,  O  monks,  comes 
to  this,  that  deliverance  from  birth,  decrepitude,  dis- 
ease, and  death  is  inseparably  connected  with  Nir- 
V3.J13.;'  and  these  two  thousand  monks,  O  Lord,  thy 
disciples,  both  those  who  are  still  under  training  and 
adepts,  who  all  of  them  are  free  from  false  views 
about  the  soul,  false  views  about  existence,  false  views 
about  cessation  of  existence,  free,  in  short,  from  all 
false  views,  who  are  fancying  themselves  to  have 
reached  the  stage  of  Nirva/za,  these  have  fallen  into 
uncertainty  by  hearing  from  the  mouth  of  the  Lord 
this  law  which  they  had  not  heard  before.  There- 
fore, O  Lord,  please  speak  to  these  monks,  to  dispel 
their  uneasiness,  so  that  the  four  classes  of  the  audi- 
ence, O  Lord,  may  be  relieved  from  their  doubt  and 
perplexity. 

On  this  speech  of  the  venerable  ^'ariputra  the  Lord 


^  I.e.  of  those  who  are  under  training,  Pali  sekho.  The  term 
is  applied  to  the  first  seven  degrees  of  persons  striving  for  sancti- 
fication,  the  eighth,  or  Arhat,  being  A^aiksha  (Asekha).  It  implies 
that  they  still  have  a  remainder  of  human  passion  to  eradicate, 
still  duties  to  perform,  still  a  probation  to  be  passed  through ;  see 
Childers,  Pali  Diet.  p.  472.  The  seven  degrees  of  6'aiksha  answer  to 
the  sevenfold  preparatory  wisdom  in  the  Yoga  system  ;  see  Yoga- 
jastra  2,  27. 


A 


72  SADDHARMA-PUiVZ)ARIKA.  III. 

said  to  him  the  following :  Have  I  not  told  thee 
before,  6'aripiitra,  that  the  Tathagata,  &c.,  preaches 
the  law  by  able  devices,  varying  directions  and  indi- 
cations, fundamental  ideas,  interpretations,  with  due 
regard  to  the  different  dispositions  and  inclinations 
of  creatures  whose  temperaments^  are  so  various  ? 
All  his  preachings  of  the  law  have  no  other  end 
but  supreme  and  perfect  enlightenment,  for  which  he 
is  rousing  beings  to  the  Bodhisattva -course.  But, 
vSariputra,  to  elucidate  this  matter  more  at  large, 
I  will  tell  thee  a  parable,  for  men  of  good  under- 
standing will  generally  readily  enough  catch  the 
meaning  of  what  is  taught  under  the  shape  of  a 
parable. 

Let  us  suppose  the  following  case,  6'ariputra.  In 
a  certain  village,  town,  borough,  province,  kingdom, 
or  capital,  there  was  a  certain  housekeeper,  old, 
aged,  decrepit,  very  advanced  in  years,  rich,  wealthy, 
opulent ;  he  had  a  great  house,  high,  spacious,  built  a 
long  time  ago  and  old,  inhabited  by  some  two,  three, 
four,  or  five  hundred  living  beings.  The  house  had 
but  one  door,  and  a  thatch  ;  its  terraces  were  totter- 
ing, the  bases  of  its  pillars  rotten,  the  coverings'-  and 
plaster  of  the  walls  loose.  On  a  sudden  the  whole 
house  was  from  every  side  put  in  conflagration  by  a 
mass  of  fire.  Let  us  suppose  that  the  man  had 
many  little  boys,  say  five,  or  ten,  or  even  twenty, 
and  that  he  himself  had  come  out  of  the  house. 

Now,  KSariputra,  that  man,  on  seeing  the  house 
from  every  side  wrapt  in  a  blaze  by  a  great  mass  of 


^  Dhatvajaya,  properly  the  disposition  of  the  constitutive  ele- 
ments of  the  body. 
^  Or,  boards. 


III.  A    PARABLE.  "J  T, 

fire,  got  afraid,  frightened,  anxious  in  his  mind,  and 
made  the  following  reflection  :  I  myself  am  able  to 
come  out  from  the  burninof  house  throuofh  the 
door,  quickly  and  safely,  without  being  touched  or 
scorched  by  that  great  mass  of  fire  ;  but  my  children, 
those  young  boys,  are  staying  in  the  burning  house, 
playing,  amusing,  and  diverting  themselves  with  all 
sorts  of  sports.  They  do  not  perceive,  nor  know,  nor 
understand,  nor  mind  that  the  house  is  on  fire,  and 
do  not  get  afraid.  Though  scorched  by  that  great 
mass  of  fire,  and  affected  with  such  a  mass  of  pain, 
they  do  not  mind  the  pain,  nor  do  they  conceive  the 
idea  of  escaping. 

The  man,  ^'ariputra,  is  strong,  has  powerful  arms, 
and  (so)  he  makes  this  reflection :  I  am  strong,  and  have 
powerful  arms  ;  why,  let  me  gather  all  my  little  boys 
and  take  them  to  my  breast  to  effect  their  escape 
from  the  house.  A  second  reflection  then  presented 
itself  to  his  mind  :  This  house  has  but  one  opening  ; 
the  door  is  shut ;  and  those  boys,  fickle,  unsteady, 
and  childlike  as  they  are,  will,  it  is  to  be  feared, 
run  hither  and  thither,  and  come  to  grief  and 
disaster  in  this  mass  of  fire.  Therefore  I  will  warn 
them.  So  resolved,  he  calls  to  the  boys  :  Come, 
my  children  ;  the  house  is  burning  with  a  mass  of 
fire ;  come,  lest  ye  be  burnt  in  that  mass  of  fire, 
and  come  to  grief  and  disaster.  But  the  ignorant 
boys  do  not  heed  the  words  of  him  who  is  their 
well-wisher;  they  are  not  afraid,  not  alarmed,  and  feel 
no  misgiving;  they  do  not  care,  nor  fly,  nor  even 
know  nor  understand  the  purport  of  the  word 
'burning;'  on  the  contrary,  they  run  hither  and 
thither,  walk  about,  and  repeatedly  look  at  their 
father ;  all,  because  they  are  so  ignorant. 


74  SADDHARMA-PUA^2)ARIKA.  III. 

Then  the  man  is  going  to  reflect  thus :  The 
house  is  burning,  is  blazing  by  a  mass  of  fire.  It 
is  to  be  feared  that  myself  as  well  as  my  children 
will  come  to  grief  and  disaster.  Let  me  therefore  by 
some  skilful  means  get  the  boys  out  of  the  house. 
The  man  knows  the  disposition  of  the  boys,  and  has 
a  clear  perception  of  their  inclinations.  Now  these 
boys  happen  to  have  many  and  manifold  toys  to 
play  with,  pretty,  nice,  pleasant,  dear,  amusing,  and 
precious.  The  man,  knowing  the  disposition  of  the 
boys,  says  to  them  :  My  children,  your  toys,  which 
are  so  pretty,  precious,  and  admirable,  which  you 
are  so  loth  to  miss,  which  are  so  various  and  multi- 
farious, (such  as)  bullock-carts,  goat-carts,  deer-carts, 
which  are  so  pretty,  nice,  dear,  and  precious  to  you, 
have  all  been  put  by  me  outside  the  house-door  for 
you  to  play  with.  Come,  run  out,  leave  the  house ; 
to  each  of  you  I  shall  give  what  he  wants.  Come 
soon ;  come  out  for  the  sake  of  these  toys.  And 
the  boys,  on  hearing  the  names  mentioned  of  such 
playthings  as  they  like  and  desire,  so  agreeable  to 
their  taste,  so  pretty,  dear,  and  delightful,  quickly 
rush  out  from  the  burning  house,  with  eager  effort 
and  great  alacrity,  one  having  no  time  to  wait  for 
the  other,  and  pushing  each  other  on  with  the  cry  of 
'  Who  shall  arrive  first,  the  very  first  ? ' 

The  man,  seeing  that  his  children  have  safely  and 
happily  escaped,  and  knowing  that  they  are  free  from 
danger,  goes  and  sits  down  in  the  open  air  on  the 
square  of  the  village,  his  heart  filled  with  joy  and 
delight,  released  from  trouble  and  hindrance,  quite 
at  ease.  The  boys  go  up  to  the  place  where  their 
father  is  sitting,  and  say :  '  Father,  give  us  those 
toys  to  play  with,  those  bullock-carts,  goat-carts,  and 


III.  A    PARABLE,  75 

deer-carts.'  Then,  ^arlputra,  the  man  gives  to  his 
sons,  who  run  swift  as  the  wind,  bullock-carts  only, 
made  of  seven  precious  substances,  provided  with 
benches,  hung  with  a  multitude  of  small  bells,  lofty, 
adorned  with  rare  and  wonderful  jewels,  embellished 
with  jewel  wreaths,  decorated  with  garlands  of 
flowers,  carpeted  with  cotton  mattresses  and  woollen 
coverlets,  covered  with  white  cloth  and  silk,  having 
on  both  sides  rosy  cushions,  yoked  with  white,  very 
fair  and  fleet  bullocks,  led  by  a  multitude  of  men. 
To  each  of  his  children  he  gives  several  bullock- 
carts  of  one  appearance  and  one  kind,  provided  with 
flags,  and  swift  as  the  wind.  That  man  does  so, 
^'ariputra,  because  being  rich,  wealthy,  and  in  posses- 
sion of  many  treasures  and  granaries,  he  rightly 
thinks  :  Why  should  I  give  these  boys  inferior  carts, 
all  these  boys  being  my  own  children,  dear  and 
precious  ?  I  have  got  such  great  vehicles,  and 
ought  to  treat  all  the  boys  equally  and  without 
partiality.  As  I  own  many  treasures  and  granaries, 
I  could  give  such  great  vehicles  to  all  beings,  how 
much  more  then  to  my  own  children.  Meanwhile 
the  boys  are  mounting  the  vehicles  with  feelings  of 
astonishment  and  wonder.  Now,  .Sariputra,  what 
is  thy  opinion  ?  Has  that  man  made  himself 
guilty  of  a  falsehood  by  first  holding  out  to  his 
children  the  prospect  of  three  vehicles  and  after- 
wards giving  to  each  of  them  the  greatest  vehicles 
only,  the  most  magnificent  vehicles  .'* 

K^ariputra  answered  :  By  no  means,  Lord ;  by  no 
means,  Sugata.  That  is  not  sufficient,  O  Lord,  to 
qualify  the  man  as  a  speaker  of  falsehood,  since  it 
only  was  a  skilful  device  to  persuade  his  children 
to   go  out   of  the  burning  house   and   save   their 


76  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARiKA.  III. 

lives.  Nay,  besides  recovering  their  very  body, 
O  Lord,  they  have  received  all  those  toys.  If 
that  man,  O  Lord,  had  given  no  single  cart, 
even  then  he  would  not  have  been  a  speaker  of 
falsehood,  for  he  had  previously  been  meditating 
on  saving  the  little  boys  from  a  great  mass  of  pain 
by  some  able  device.  Even  in  this  case,  O  Lord, 
the  man  would  not  have  been  guilty  of  falsehood, 
and  far  less  now  that  he,  considering  his  having 
plenty  of  treasures  and  prompted  by  no  other  motive 
but  the  love  of  his  children,  gives  to  all,  to  coax^ 
them,  vehicles  of  one  kind,  and  those  the  greatest 
vehicles.  That  man,  Lord,  is  not  guilty  of  false- 
hood. 

The  venerable  ^'ariputra  having  thus  spoken,  the 
Lord  said  to  him  :  Very  well,  very  well,  ^'ariputra, 
quite  so ;  it  is  even  as  thou  sayest.  So,  too,  ^'ari- 
putra,  the  Tathagata,  &c.,  is  free  from  all  dangers, 
wholly  exempt  from  all  misfortune,  despondency, 
calamity,  pain,  grief,  the  thick  enveloping  dark  mists 
of  ignorance.  He,  the  Tathagata,  endowed  with 
Buddha-knowledge,  forces,  absence  of  hesitation, 
uncommon  properties,  and  mighty  by  magical 
power,  is  the  father  of  the  world  ^,  who  has  reached 
the  highest  perfection  in  the  knowledge  of  skilful 
means,  who  is  most  merciful,  long-suffering,  bene- 
volent, compassionate.     He  appears   in  this   triple 

^  ASlaghamana, 

^  Here  the  Buddha  is  represented  as  a  wise  and  benevolent 
father ;  he  is  the  heavenly  father,  Brahma.  As  such  he  was  repre- 
sented as  sitting  on  a  '  lotus  seat.'  How  common  this  representa- 
tion was  in  India,  at  least  in  the  sixth  century  of  our  era,  appears 
from  Varaha-Mihira's  Br/hat-Sawhita,  chap.  58,  44,  where  the  fol- 
lowing rule  is  laid  down  for  the  Buddha  idols :  '  Buddha  shall  be 
(represented)  sitting  on  a  lotus  seat,  like  the  father  of  the  world.* 


III.  A    PARABLE.  77 

world,  which  is  like  a  house  the  roof  ^  and  shelter 
whereof  are  decayed,  (a  house)  burning  by  a  mass 
of  misery,  in  order  to  deliver  from  affection,  hatred, 
and  delusion  the  beings  subject  to  birth,  old  age, 
disease,  death,  grief,  wailing,  pain,  melancholy,  de- 
spondency, the  dark  enveloping  mists  of  ignorance,  in 
order  to  rouse  them  to  supreme  and  perfect  enlighten- 
ment. Once  born,  he  sees  how  the  creatures  are 
burnt,  tormented,  vexed,  distressed  by  birth,  old 
age,  disease,  death,  grief,  wailing,  pain,  melancholy, 
despondency ;  how  for  the  sake  of  enjoyments,  and 
prompted  by  sensual  desires,  they  severally  suffer 
various  pains.  In  consequence  both  of  what  in  this 
world  they  are  seeking  and  what  they  have  acquired, 
they  will  in  a  future  state  suffer  various  pains,  in 
hell,  in  the  brute  creation,  in  the  realm  of  Yama  ; 
suffer  such  pains  as  poverty  in  the  world  of  gods  or 
men,  union  with  hateful  persons  or  things,  and 
separation  from  the  beloved  ones.  And  whilst  in- 
cessantly whirling  in  that  mass  of  evils  they  are 
sporting,  playing,  diverting  themselves ;  they  do  not 
fear,  nor  dread,  nor  are  they  seized  with  terror;  they 
do  not  know,  nor  mind ;  they  are  not  startled,  do 
not  try  to  escape,  but  are  enjoying  themselves  in 
that  triple  world  which  is  like  unto  a  burning  house, 
and  run  hither  and  thither.  Thouorh  overwhelmed 
by  that  mass  of  evil,  they  do  not  conceive  the  idea 
that  they  must  beware  of  it. 

Under  such  circumstances,  ^'ariputra,  the  Tatha- 
gata  reflects  thus :  Verily,  I  am  the  father  of  these 
beings;  I  must  save  them  from  this  mass  of  evil,  and 
bestow  on  them  the  immense,  inconceivable  bliss  of 

^  Or,  coping. 


yS  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  ITI. 

Buddha-knowledge,  wherewith  they  shall  sport,  play, 
and  divert  themselves,  wherein  they  shall  find  their 
rest. 

Then,  ^'ariputra,  the  Tathagata  reflects  thus  :  If, 
in  the  conviction  of  my  possessing  the  power  of 
knowledge  and  magical  faculties,  I  manifest  to  these 
beings  the  knowledge,  forces,  and  absence  of  hesita- 
tion of  the  Tathagata,  without  availing  myself  of 
some  device,  these  beings  will  not  escape.  For  they 
are  attached  to  the  pleasures  of  the  five  senses,  to 
worldly  pleasures ;  they  will  not  be  freed  from  birth, 
old  age,  disease,  death,  grief,  wailing,  pain,  melan- 
choly, despondency,  by  which  they  are  burnt,  tor- 
mented, vexed,  distressed.  Unless  they  are  forced 
to  leave  the  triple  world  which  is  like  a  house  the 
shelter  and  roof  whereof  is  in  a  blaze,  how  are  they 
to  get  acquainted  with  ^  Buddha-knowledge  ? 

Now,  ^'ariputra,  even  as  that  man  with  powerful 
arms,  without  using  the  strength  of  his  arms,  attracts 
his  children  out  of  the  burning  house  by  an  able 
device,  and  afterwards  gives  them  magnificent,  great 
carts,  so,  ^'ariputra,  the  Tathagata,  the  Arhat,  &c., 
possessed  of  knowledge  and  freedom  from  all  hesita- 
tion, without  using  them,  in  order  to  attract  the 
creatures  out  of  the  triple  world  which  is  like  a 
burning  house  with  decayed  roof  and  shelter,  shows, 
by  his  knowledge  of  able  devices,  three  vehicles, 
viz.  the  vehicle  of  the  disciples,  the  vehicle  of  the 
Pratyekabuddhas,  and  the  vehicle  of  the  Bodhisat- 
tvas.  By  means  of  these  three  vehicles  he  attracts 
the    creatures   and  speaks   to  them  thus :    Do  not 

^  Paribhotsyante;  Burnoufs  rendering, 'pourront  jouir,' points 
to  a  reading  paribhok  shy  ante. 


III.  A    PARABLE.  79 

delight  in  this  triple  world,  which  is  like  a  burning 
house,  in  these  miserable  forms,  sounds,  odours,  fla- 
vours, and  contacts  ^  For  in  delighting  in  this  triple 
world  ye  are  burnt,  heated,  inflamed  with  the  thirst 
inseparable  from  the  pleasures  of  the  five  senses. 
Fly  from  this  triple  world ;  betake  yourselves  to 
the  three  vehicles  :  the  vehicle  of  the  disciples,  the 
vehicle  of  the  Pratyekabuddhas,  the  vehicle  of  the 
Bodhisattvas.  I  give  you  my  pledge  for  it,  that  I 
shall  give  you  these  three  vehicles ;  make  an  effort 
to  run  out  of  this  triple  world.  And  to  attract 
them  I  say :  These  vehicles  are  grand,  praised  by 
the  Aryas,  and  provided  with  most  pleasant  things ; 
with  such  you  are  to  sport,  play,  and  divert  your- 
selves in  a  noble  ^  manner.  Ye  will  feel  the  great 
delight  of  the  faculties  ^%  powers  *,  constituents  of 
Bodhi,  meditations,  the  (eight)  degrees  of  emancipa- 
tion, self-concentration,  and  the  results  of  self-con- 
centration, and  ye  will  become  greatly  happy  and 
cheerful. 

^  The  same  idea  and  the  same  moral  form  the  warp  and  woof 
of  the  sermon  on  the  hill  of  Gaya^-irsha,  the  Aditta-pariyaya,  Maha- 
vagga  I,  21.  This  sermon  was  the  second  in  course  of  time,  if 
we  leave  out  of  account  the  repetitions  of  the  first,  preached  near 
Benares.  The  parable  also  is  propounded  at  the  time  when  the 
Master  moves  the  wheel  of  the  law  for  the  second  time ;  see  above, 
St.  34,  Hence  we  may  conclude  that  the  sermon  and  parable  are 
variations  of  one  and  the  same  monkish  moralization  on  the  base 
of  a  more  primitive  cosmological  legend. 

^  Akr/pa«am,  properly,  not  miserably. 

^  Indriya;  here  apparently  the  five  moral  faculties  of  faith, 
energy,  recollection,  contemplation,  and  wisdom  or  prescience ; 
cf.  Spence  Hardy,  Manual,  p.  498  ;  Lalita-vistara,  p.  37. 

*  Bala,  the  same  as  the  indriya,  with  this  difference,  it  would 
seem,  that  the  balas  are  the  faculties  in  action  or  more  developed ; 
cf.  Spence  Hardy,  1.  c,  and  Lalita-vistara,  1.  c. 


8o  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  III. 

Now,  ^'ariputra,  the  beings  who  have  become  wise 
have  faith  in  the  Tathagata,  the  father  of  the  world, 
and  consequently  apply  themselves  to  his  command- 
ments. Amongst  them  there  are  some  who,  wishing 
to  follow  the  dictate  of  an  authoritative  voice,  apply 
themselves  to  the  commandment  of  the  Tathigata 
to  acquire  the  knowledge  of  the  four  great  truths, 
for  the  sake  of  their  own  complete  Nirvana..  These 
one  may  say  to  be  those  who,  coveting  the  vehicle 
of  the  disciples,  fly  from  the  triple  world,  just  as 
some  of  the  boys  will  fly  from  that  burning  house, 
prompted  by  a  desire  of  getting  a  cart  yoked  with 
deer.  Other  beings  desirous  of  the  science  without 
a  master,  of  self-restraint  and  tranquillity,  apply 
themselves  to  the  commandment  of  the  Tathagata 
to  learn  to  understand  causes  and  effects,  for  the 
sake  of  their  own  complete  Nirva;2a.  These  one 
may  say  to  be  those  who,  coveting  the  vehicle  of 
the  Pratyekabuddhas,  fly  from  the  triple  world,  just 
as  some  of  the  boys  fly  from  the  burning  house, 
prompted  by  the  desire  of  getting  a  cart  yoked  with 
goats.  Others  again  desirous  of  the  knowledge  of  the 
all-knowing,  the  knowledge  of  Buddha,  the  knowledge 
of  the  self-born  one,  the  science  without  a  master, 
apply  themselves  to  the  commandment  of  the  Tathd- 
gata  to  learn  to  understand  the  knowledge,  powers, 
and  freedom  from  hesitation  of  the  Tathagata,  for 
the  sake  of  the  common  weal  and  happiness,  out  of 
compassion  to  the  world,  for  the  benefit,  weal,  and 
happiness  of  the  world  at  large,  both  gods  and  men, 
for  the  sake  of  the  complete  Nirva;^a  of  all  beings. 
These  one  may  say  to  be  those  who,  coveting  the 
great  vehicle,  fly  from  the  triple  world.  Therefore 
they  are    called   Bodhisattvas  Mahasattvas.     They 


ITT.  A    PARABLE.  8 1 

may  be  likened  to  those  among  the  boys  who  have 
fled  from  the  burning  house  prompted  by  the  desire 
of  getting  a  cart  yoked  with  bullocks. 

In  the  same  manner,  6ariputra,  as  that  man,  on 
seeing  his  children  escaped  from  the  burning  house 
and  knowing  them  safely  and  happily  rescued  and 
out  of  danger,  in  the  consciousness  of  his  great 
wealth,  gives  the  boys  one  single  grand  cart ;  so, 
too,  ^'ariputra,  the  Tathagata,  the  Arhat,  &c.,  on 
seeing  many  ko/is  of  beings  recovered  ^  from  the 
triple  world,  released  from  sorrow,  fear,  terror,  and 
calamity,  having  escaped  owing  to  the  command  of 
the  Tathagata,  delivered  from  all  fears,  calamities,  and 
difficulties,  and  having  reached  the  bliss  of  Nirva;^a, 
so,  too,  ^ariputra,  the  Tathagata,  the  Arhat,  &c., 
considering  that  he  possesses  great  wealth  of 
knowledge,  power,  and  absence  of  hesitation,  and 
that  all  beings  are  his  children,  leads  them  by  no 
other  vehicle  but  the  Buddha-vehicle  to  full  de- 
velopment^. But  he  does  not  teach  a  particular 
Nirva/za  for  each  being;  he  causes  all  beings  to 
reach  complete  Nirva;2a  by  means  of  the  complete 
Nirva;2a  of  the  Tathagata.  And  those  beings,  Sa.n- 
putra,  who  are  delivered  from  the  triple  world,  to 
them  the  Tathagata  gives  as  toys  to  amuse  themselves 
with  the  lofty  pleasures  of  the  Aryas,  the  pleasures 


^  Paripur«an;  in  one  MS.  there  is  a  second-Iiand  reading, 
parimuktan.  I  suppose  that  paripurwa  is  the  original  reading, 
but  that  we  have  to  take  it  in  the  sense  of '  recovered,  healed.' 

2  Time,  Sivz  or  Vish«u  ekapad,  the  One-footed,  who  at  the  same 
time  is  tripad,  three-footed,  leads  all  living  beings  to  final  rest. 
The  Buddha-vehicle  is  the  ratha  ekaZ-akra,  the  one-wheeled 
carriage,  each  wheel  being  trinabhi,  three-naved,  as  in  Rig-veda 
I,  164,  2. 

[21]  G 


82  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  III. 

of  meditation,  emancipation,  self-concentration,  and 
its  results ;  (toys)  all  of  the  same  kind.  Even  as 
that  man,  6'ariputra,  cannot  be  said  to  have  told  a 
falsehood  for  having  held  out  to  those  boys  the 
prospect  of  three  vehicles  and  given  to  all  of  them 
but  one  great  vehicle,  a  magnificent  vehicle  made  of 
seven  precious  substances,  decorated  with  all  sorts 
of  ornaments,  a  vehicle  of  one  kind,  the  most  egre- 
gious of  all,  so,  too,  6'arlputra,  the  Tathagata,  the 
Arhat,  &c.,  tells  no  falsehood  when  by  an  able 
device  he  first  holds  forth  three  vehicles  and  after- 
wards leads  all  to  complete  Nirva;/a  by  the  one 
great  vehicle.  For  the  Tathagata,  6'ariputra,  who 
is  rich  in  treasures  and  storehouses  of  abundant 
knowledge,  powers,  and  absence  of  hesitation,  is 
able  to  teach  all  beings  the  law  which  is  connected 
with  the  knowledge  of  the  all-knowing.  In  this 
way,  K^ariputra,  one  has  to  understand  how  the 
Tathagata  by  an  able  device  and  direction  shows 
but  one  vehicle,  the  great  vehicle. 

And  on  that  occasion  the  Lord  uttered  the  fol- 
lowing stanzas : 

39.  A  man  has  ^  an  old  house,  large,  but  very 
infirm ;  its  terraces  are  decaying  and  the  columns 
rotten  at  their  bases. 

40.  The  windows  and  balconies  are  partly  ruined, 
the  wall  as  well  as  its  coverings  and  plaster  decaying; 
the  coping  shows  rents  from  age  ;  the  thatch  is  every- 
where pierced  with  holes. 

41.  It  is  inhabited  by  no  less  than  five  hundred 
beings ;  containing  many  cells  and  closets  filled  with 
excrements  and  disgusting. 

^  The  original  has  '  as  if  a  man  had,'  &c.  I  have  changed  the 
construction  to  render  it  less  wearisome. 


III.  A    PARABLE.  83 

42.  Its  roof-rafters  are  wholly  ruined ;  the  walls 
and  partitions  crumbling  away;  ko/is  of  vultures 
nestle  in  it,  as  well  as  doves,  owls,  and  other  birds. 

43.  There  are  in  every  corner  dreadful  snakes, 
most  venomous  and  horrible  ;  scorpions  and  mice  of 
all  sorts ;  it  is  the  abode  of  very  wicked  creatures 
of  every  description. 

44.  Further,  one  may  meet  in  it  here  and  there 
beings  not  belonging  to  the  human  race.  It  is 
defiled  with  excrement  and  urine,  and  teeming  with 
worms,  insects,  and  fire-flies ;  it  resounds  from  the 
howling  of  dogs  and  jackals. 

45.  In  it  are  horrible  hyenas  that  are  wont  to 
devour  human  carcasses ;  many  dogs  and  jackals 
greedily  seeking  the  matter  of  corpses. 

46.  Those  animals  weak  from  perpetual  hunger 
go  about  in  several  places  to  feed  upon  their  prey, 
and  quarrelling  fill  the  spot  with  their  cries.  Such 
is  that  most  horrible  house. 

47.  There  are  also  very  malign  goblins,  who 
violate  human  corpses ;    in  several  spots  there  are 

^centipedes,  huge  snakes,  and  vipers. 

48.  Those  animals  creep  into  all  corners,  where 
they  make  nests  to  deposit  their  brood,  which  is 
often  devoured  by  the  goblins. 

49.  And  when  those  cruel-minded  goblins  are 
satiated  with  feeding  upon  the  flesh  of  other  crea- 
tures, so  that  their  bodies  are  big,  then  they  com- 
mence sharply  fighting  on  the  spot. 

50.  In  the  wasted  retreats  are  dreadful,  malign 
urchins,  some  of  them  measuring  one  span,  others 
one  cubit  or  two  cubits,  all  nimble  in  their  move- 
ments. 

51.  They  are  in  the  habit  of  seizing  dogs  by  the 

G  2 


84  SADDHARMA-PUiVi5ARiKA.  III. 

feet,  throwing  them  upside   down  upon  the    floor, 
pinching  their  necks  and  using  them  ill. 

52.  There  also  live  yelling  ghosts  naked,  black, 
wan,  tall,  and  high,  who,  hungry  and  in  quest  of  food, 
are  here  and  there  emitting  cries  of  distress. 

53.  Some  have  a  mouth  like  a  needle,  others 
have  a  face  like  a  cow's  ;  they  are  of  the  size  of  men 
or  dogs,  go  with  entangled  hair,  and  utter  plaintive 
cries  from  want  of  food. 

54.  Those  goblins,  ghosts,  imps,  like  vultures,  are 
always  looking  out  through  the  windows  and  loop- 
holes, in  all  directions  in  search  of  food. 

55.  Such  is  that  dreadful  house,  spacious  and 
high,  but  very  infirm,  full  of  holes,  frail  and  dreary. 
(Let  us  suppose  that)  it  is  the  property  of  a  certain 
man, 

56.  And  that  while  he  is  out  of  doors  the  house  is 
reached  by  a  conflagration,  so  that  on  a  sudden  it 
is  wrapt  in  a  blazing  mass  of  fire  on  every  side. 

57.  The  beams  and  rafters  consumed  by  the  fire, 
the  columns  and  partitions  in  flame  are  crackling  most 
dreadfully,  whilst  goblins  and  ghosts  are  yelling. 

58.  Vultures  are  driven  out  by  hundreds ;  urchins 
withdraw  with  parched  faces  ;  hundreds  of  mis- 
chievous beasts  of  prey  ^  run,  scorched,  on  every 
side,  crying  and  shouting  ^. 

59.  Many  poor  devils  move  about,  burnt  by  the 
fire ;  while  burning  they  tear  one  another  with  the 
teeth,  and  bespatter  each  other  with  their  blood. 

^  Yyada. 

^  Krosanti,  var.  lect.  kroshanti.  Burnoufs  version, '  sont  en 
fureur,'  points  to  a  reading  roshanti,  which,  however,  is  not  appro- 
priate, for  the  would-be  conflagration  is  a  description  of  the  time 
of  twilight. 


Til.  A    PARABLE.  85 

60.  Hyenas  also  perish  there,  in  the  act  of  eating 
one  another.  The  excrements  burn,  and  a  loath- 
some stench  spreads  in  all  directions. 

61.  The  centipedes,  trying  to  fly,  are  devoured  by 
the  urchins.  The  ghosts,  with  burning  hair,  hover 
about,  equally  vexed  with  hunger  and  heat. 

62.  In  such  a  state  is  that  awful  house,  where 
thousands  of  flames  are  breaking  out  on  every  side. 
But  the  man  who  is  the  master  of  the  house  looks 
on  from  without. 

63.  And  he  hears  his  own  children,  whose  minds 
are  engaged  in  playing  with  their  toys,  in  their  fond- 
ness of  which  they  amuse  themselves,  as  fools  do  in 
their  ignorance. 

64.  And  as  he  hears  them  he  quickly  steps  in^  to 
save  his  children,  lest  his  ignorant  children  might 
perish  in  the  flames. 

65.  He  tells  them  the  defect  of  the  house,  and 
says  :  This,  young  man^  of  good  family,  is  a  miser- 
able house,  a  dreadful  one ;  the  various  creatures  in 
it,  and  this  fire  to  boot,  form  a  series  of  evils. 

66.  In  it  are  snakes,  mischievous  goblins,  urchins, 
and  ghosts  in  great  number ;  hyenas,  troops  of  dogs 
and  jackals,  as  well  as  vultures,  seeking  their  prey. 

67.  Such  beings  live  in  this  house,  which,  apart 

^  This  trait  is  wanting  in  the  prose  relation.  The  explana- 
tion, I  fancy,  is  this  :  If  the  description  of  the  glowing  house 
refers  to  morning  twilight,  the  father  (Pitamaha,  or  Day-god) 
will  needs  step  in  afterwards ;  if,  on  the  other  hand,  the  evening 
twilight  is  meant,  he  will  already  have  left  the  house.  In  the 
former  case  he  calls  his  children  to  activity,  to  their  daily  work; 
in  the  latter  he  admonishes  them  to  take  their  rest,  exhorts  them 
to  think  of  the  end  of  life. 

^  In  addressing  more  persons  it  is  not  uncommon  that  only  one 
is  addressed  as  representing  the  whole  company. 


86  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARlKA.  III. 

from  the  fire,  is  extremely  dreadful,  and  miserable 
enough  ;  and  now  comes  to  it  this  fire  blazing  on 
all  sides. 

68.  The  foolish  boys,  however,  though  admo- 
nished, do  not  mind  their  father's  words,  deluded  as 
they  are  by  their  toys ;  they  do  not  even  under- 
stand him. 

69.  Then  the  man  thinks :  I  am  now  in  anxiety 
on  account  of  my  children.  What  is  the  use  of  my 
having  sons  if  I  lose  them  ?  No,  they  shall  not 
perish  by  this  fire. 

70.  Instantly  a  device  occurred  to  his  mind : 
These  young  (and  ignorant)  children  are  fond  of 
toys,  and  have  none  just  now  to  play  with.  Oh, 
they  are  so  foolish  ! 

71.  He  then  says  to  them:  Listen,  my  sons,  I 
have  carts  of  different  sorts,  yoked  with  deer,  goats, 
and  excellent  bullocks,  lofty,  great,  and  completely 
furnished. 

72.  They  are  outside  the  house ;  run  out,  do  with 
them  what  you  like ;  for  your  sake  have  I  caused 
them  to  be  made.  Run  out  all  together,  and  rejoice 
to  have  them. 

73.  All  the  boys,  on  hearing  of  such  carts,  exert 
themselves,  immediately  rush  out  hastily,  and  reach, 
free  from  harm,  the  open  air. 

74.  On  seeing  that  the  children  have  come  out, 
the  man  betakes  himself  to  the  square  in  the  centre 
of  the  village  ^  and  there  from  the  throne  he  is  sitting 
on  he  says  :  Good  people,  now  I  feel  at  ease. 


^  The  sun  reaches  the  meridian  point.  The  poetic  version 
which  makes  the  father  enter  the  blazing  house  is  consistent ;  the 
prose  version  has  efifaced  a  necessary  trait  of  the  story.    Therefore 


ITI.  A    PARABLE.  87 

75.  These  poor  sons  of  mine,  whom  I  have  re- 
covered with  difficulty,  my  own  dear  twenty  young 
children,  were  in  a  dreadful,  wretched,  horrible  house, 
full  of  many  animals. 

"^d.  As  it  was  burning  and  wrapt  in  thousands  of 
flames,  they  were  amusing  themselves  in  it  with 
playing,  but  now  I  have  rescued  them  all.  There- 
fore  I  now  feel  most  happy. 

"]"].  The  children,  seeing  their  father  happy,  ap- 
proached him,  and  said:  Dear  father,  give  us,  as  you 
have  promised \  those  nice  vehicles  of  three  kinds  ; 

78.  And  make  true  all  that  you  promised  us 
in  the  house  when  saying,  '  I  will  give  you  three 
sorts  of  vehicles.'  Do  give  them ;  it  is  now  the 
right  time. 

79.  Now  the  man  (as  we  have  supposed)  had 
a  mighty  treasure  of  gold,  silver,  precious  stones, 
and  pearls ;  he  possessed  bullion,  numerous  slaves, 
domestics,  and  vehicles  of  various  kinds  ; 

80.  Carts  made  of  precious  substances,  yoked 
with  bullocks,  most  excellent,  with  benches^  and 
a  row  of  tinkling  bells,  decorated  with  umbrellas 
and  flags,  and  adorned  with  a  network  of  gems  and 
pearls. 

81.  They  are  embellished  with  gold,  and  arti- 
ficial wreaths  hanging  down  here  and  there  ;  covered 
all  around  with  excellent  cloth  and  fine  white 
muslin. 

82.  Those  carts  are  moreover  furnished  with 
choice  mattresses  of  fine  silk,  serving  for  cushions, 

it  is  posterior  to  the  version  in  metre,  and  apparently  belongs  to 
a  much  later  period. 

^  Yathabhibhashitam,  var.  lect.  "bhavitam. 

"^  Vedikas. 


88  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARlKA.  III. 

and  covered  with  choice  carpets  showing  the  images 
of  cranes  and  swans,  and  worth  thousands  of  koz^is. 

83.  The  carts  are  yoked  with  white  bullocks,  well 
fed,  strong,  of  great  size,  very  fine,  who  are  tended 
by  numerous  persons. 

84.  Such  excellent  carts  that  man  gives  to  all  his 
sons,  who,  overjoyed  and  charmed,  go  and  play 
with  them  in  all  directions. 

85.  In  the  same  manner,  ^'ariputra,  I,  the  great 
Seer,  am  the  protector  and  father  of  all  beings,  and 
all  creatures  who,  childlike,  are  captivated  by  the 
pleasures  of  the  triple  world,  are  my  sons. 

86.  This  triple  world  is  as  dreadful  as  that  house, 
overwhelmed  with  a  number  of  evils,  entirely  in- 
flamed on  every  side  by  a  hundred  different  sorts  of 
birth,  old  age,  and  disease. 

87.  But  I,  who  am  detached  from  the  triple  world 
and  serene,  am  living  in  absolute  retirement^  in  a 
wood  I  This  triple  .world  is  my  domain,  and  those 
who  in  it  are  suffering  from  burning  heat  are  my 
sons. 

88.  And  I  told  its  evils  because  I  had  resolved 
upon  saving  them,  but  they  would  not  listen  to  me, 
because  all  of  them  were  ignorant  and  their  hearts 
attached  to  the  pleasures  of  sense. 

89.  Then  I  employ  an  able  device,  and  tell  them 
of  the  three  vehicles,  so  showing  them  the  means 
of  evading^  the  numerous  evils  of  the  triple  world 
which  are  known  to  me. 

90.  And  those  of  my  sons  who  adhere   to   me, 

^  Ekantasthayin. 

2  Van  a,  a  wood,  also  means  a  cloud,  the  cloudy  region. 
^  Nirdhavanarthaya;    a   var.   lect.  has   nirvapanarthaya, 
i.  e.  to  allay. 


III.  A    PARABLE.  89 


who  are  mighty  in  the  six  transcendent  faculties 
(Abhi^/'^as)  and  the  triple  science,  the  Pratyeka- 
buddhas,  as  well  as  the  Bodhisattvas  unable  to 
slide  back ; 

91.  And  those  (others)  who  equally  are  my  sons, 
to  them  I  just  now  am  showing,  by  means  of  this 
excellent  allegory,  the  single  Buddha-vehicle.  Re- 
ceive it ;  ye  shall  all  become  6^inas. 

92.  It  is  most  excellent  and  sweet,  the  most  ex- 
alted in  the  world,  that  knowledge  of  the  Buddhas, 
the  most  high  among  men ;  it  is  something  sublime 
and  adorable. 

93.  The  powers,  meditations,  degrees  of  emanci- 
pation and  self-concentration  by  many  hundreds  of 
ko/is,  that  is  the  exalted  vehicle  in  which  the  sons 
of  Buddha  take  a  never-ending  delight. 

94.  In  playing  with  it  they  pass  days  and  nights, 
fortnights,  months,  seasons,  years,  intermediate  kal- 
pas,  nay,  thousands  of  ko^is  of  kalpas^ 

95.  This  is  the  lofty  vehicle  of  jewels  which 
sundry  Bodhisattvas  and  the  disciples  listening  to 
the  Sugata  employ  to  go  and  sport  on  the  terrace 
of  enlightenment. 

96.  Know  then,  Tishya^  that  there  is  no  second 

^  As  the  mean  duration  of  a  man's  life  extends  over  thousands 
of  ko/is  of  kalpas  or  iEons,  it  is  evident  that  the  ^on  here 
meant  is  in  reaHty  an  extremely  small  particle  of  time,  an  atom. 
The  meaning  attached  to  it  was  perhaps  that  of  asu  or  pra;^a, 
a  respiration.  It  seems  to  me,  however,  more  probable  that  kalpa, 
as  synonymous  with  rupa,  simply  denotes  a  unit,  e.g.  of  atoms  of 
time. 

2  I.  e.  -S'ariputra,  otherwise  named  Upatishya,  i.  e.  secondary 
Tishya.  The  canonical  etymology  of  the  name  of  Upatishya  is 
to  be  found  in  BurnouPs  Introduction,  p.  48,  and  Schiefner's 
Lebensbeschreibung,  p.  355. 


90  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARlKA.  ITT. 


vehicle  in  this  world  anywhere  to  be  found,  in  what- 
ever direction  thou  shalt  search,  apart  from  the 
device  (shown)  by  the  most  high  among  men. 

97.  Ye  are  my  children,  I  am  your  father,  who  has 
removed  you  from  pain,  from  the  triple  world,  from 
fear  and  danger,  when  you  had  been  burning  for 
many  ko^is  of  ^ons. 

98.  And  I  am  teaching  blessed  rest  (Nirvi;/a),  in 
so  far  as,  though  you  have  not  yet  reached  (final)  rest, 
you  are  delivered  from  the  trouble  of  the  mundane 
whirl,  provided  you  seek  the  vehicle  of  the  Buddhas. 

99.  Any  Bodhisattvas  here  present  obey  my 
Buddha-rules.  Such  is  the  skilfulness  of  the  6^ina 
that  he  disciplines  many  Bodhisattvas. 

100.  When  the  creatures  in  this  world  delight  in 
low  and  contemptible  pleasures,  then  the  Chief  of 
the  world,  who  always  speaks  the  truth,  indicates 
pain  as  the  (first)  great  truth. 

loi.  And  to  those  who  are  ignorant  and  too 
simple-minded  to  discover  the  root  of  that  pain 
I  lay  open  the  way :  '  Awaking  of  full  consciousness, 
strong  desire  is  the  origin  of  pain^' 

102.  Always  try,  unattached^  to  suppress  desire. 
This  is  my  third  truth,  that  of  suppression.  It  is  an 
infallible  means  of  deliverance  ;  for  by  practising 
this  method  one  shall  become  emancipated  ^ 

103.  And  from  what  are  they  emancipated,  ^'ari- 

^  Samudagama-^,  trt'shna.  du-^khasya  sambhava/z.  lam 
not  certain  of  the  translation  of  samudagama,  which  recurs  below 
in  Chap.  V,  in  the  apparent  sense  of  full  knowledge,  agreeing  with 
what  the  dictionaries  give. 

^  AnijT/'ta^. 

^  Na  ko  marga;^  hi  bhavitva  vimu'ktu  bhoti  (var.  lect. 
bhotu).  The  words  na  ko  spoil  metre  and  sense,  and  must  be 
expunged. 


III.  A    PARABLE.  9 1 

putra  ?  They  are  emancipated  from  chimeras \  Yet 
they  are  not  wholly  freed ;  the  Chief  declares  that 
they  have  not  yet  reached  (final  and  complete)  rest 
in  this  world. 

104.  Why  is  it  that  I  do  not  pronounce  one  to  be 
delivered  before  one's  having  reached  the  highest, 
supreme  enlightenment  ?  (Because)  such  is  my  will ; 
I  am  the  ruler  of  the  law  2,  who  is  born  in  this  world 
to  lead  to  beatitude. 

105.  This,  ^'ariputra,  is  the  closing  word  of  my  law 
which  now  at  the  last  time  I  pronounce^  for  the  weal 
of  the  world  including  the  gods.  Preach  it  in  all 
quarters. 

106.  And  if  some  one  speaks  to  you  these  words, 
'  I  joyfully  accept,'  and  with  signs  of  utmost  reverence 
receives  this  Siltra,  thou  mayst  consider  that  man 
to  be  unable  to  slide  back*. 

107.  To  believe  in  this  Sutra  one  must  have  seen 
former  Tathagatas,  paid  honour  to  them,  and  heard 
a  law  similar  to  this. 

108.  To  believe  in  my  supreme  word  one  must 
have  seen  me ;  thou  and  the  assembly  of  monks 
have  seen  all  these  Bodhisattvas. 

109.  This   Sutra  is   apt  to  puzzle  the  ignorant^, 

^  Kutaj/^a  te,  iS'ariputa,  vimukta  ?  Asantagrahatu  (abl.)  vimukta 
bhonti ;  na[/^a]  tava  te  sarvatu  mukta  bhonti. 

^  Dharmara^a,  a  well-known  epithet  of  Yama  the  god  of  death; 
he  is  the  real  tamer  of  men,  the  master  of  gods  and  men,  &c. 

^  Mama  dharmamudra  (properly,  seal,  closure  of  my  law) 
y^  pd.ska.ka.\e  (var.  lect.  paj^imi  kale)  maya  adya  (var.  lect. 
mamadya)  bhashita. 

*  Or,  to  swerve  from  his  course,  his  purpose. 

^  Properly,  young  children,  because  one  must  have  seen  former 
Tathagatas,  i.  e.  lived  some  revolving  suns  before  having  an  idea 
of  death. 


92  SADDHARMA-PlJiVZ)ARIKA.  III. 

and  I  do  not  pronounce  it  before  having  penetrated 
to  superior  knowledge.  Indeed,  it  is  not  within  the 
range  of  the  disciples,  nor  do  the  Pratyekabuddhas 
come  to  it. 

no.  But  thou,  KS'ariputra,  hast  good  will,  not  to 
speak  of  my  other  disciples  here.  They  will  walk 
in  my  faith,  though  each  cannot  have  his  individual 
knowledge. 

111.  But  do  not  speak  of  this  matter  to  haughty 
persons,  nor  to  conceited  ones,  nor  to  Yogins  who 
are  not  self-restrained  ;  for  the  fools,  always  revelling 
in  sensual  pleasures,  might  in  their  blindness  scorn 
the  law  manifested. 

112.  Now  hear  the  dire  results  when  one  scorns 
my  skilfulness  and  the  Buddha-rules  for  ever  fixed 
in  the  world;  when  one,  with  sullen  brow,  scorns 
the  vehicle. 

113.  Hear  the  destiny  of  those  who  have  scorned 
such  a  Sutra  like  this,  whether  during  my  lifetime  or 
after  my  Nirva;^a,  or  who  have  wronged  the  monks. 

114.  After  having  disappeared  from  amongst 
men,  they  shall  dwell  in  the  lowest  hell  (AvU'i) 
during  a  whole  kalpa,  and  thereafter  they  shall  fall 
lower  and  lower,  the  fools,  passing  through  repeated 
births  for  many  intermediate  kalpas. 

115.  And  when  they  have  vanished  from  amongst 
the  inhabitants  of  hell,  they  shall  further  descend  to 
the  condition  of  brutes,  be  even  as  dogs  and  jackals, 
and  become  a  sport  to  others. 

116.  Under  such  circumstances  they  shall  grow 
blackish  of  colour,  spotted,  covered  v/ith  sores,  itchy; 
moreover,  they  shall  be  hairless  and  feeble,  (all) 
those  who  have  an  aversion  to  my  supreme  en- 
lightenment. 


TTT.  A    PARABLE. 


1 T  7.  They  are  ever  despised  amongst  animals  ;  hit 
by  clods  or  weapons  they  yell ;  everywhere  they  are 
threatened  with  sticks,  and  their  bodies  are  emaci- 
ated from  hunger  and  thirst. 

118.  Sometimes  they  become  camels  or  asses, 
carrying  loads,  and  are  beaten  with  whips  ^  and 
sticks  ;  they  are  constantly  occupied  with  thoughts 
of  eating,  the  fools  who  have  scorned  the  Buddha- 
rule. 

119.  At  other  times  they  become  ugly  jackals, 
half  blind  and  crippled^;  the  helpless  creatures  are 
vexed  by  the  village  boys,  who  throw  clods  and 
weapons  at  them. 

120.  Again  shooting  off  from  that  place,  those 
fools  become  animals  with  bodies  of  five  hundred 
yo^anas,  whirling  round,  dull  and  lazy. 

121.  They  have  no  feet,  and  creep  on  the  belly  ^; 
to  be  devoured  by  many  ko/is  of  animals  is  the 
dreadful  punishment  they  have  to  suffer  for  having 
scorned  a  Sutra  like  this. 

122.  And  whenever  they  assume  a  human  shape, 
they  are  born  crippled,  maimed*,  crooked,  one-eyed, 
blind,  dull,  and  low,  they  having  no  faith  in  my 
Sutra. 


*  Kasha,  var.  lect.  sata,  with  a  marginal  correction  sad  a  (for 
sada).  Burnouf's  'cent  batons'  is  evidently  based  upon  the 
reading  sata. 

2  Ka«akaku«</akajy^a,  var.  lect.  valaka°,with  marginal  correc- 
tion kanaka".  The  translation  is  doubtful;  cf.  st.  116  below. 
Ku«(/aka  I  connect  with  ku«/=vikalikara;2e  and  the  Greek 

^Kro</asa»^krin,var.lect.°saw^?^in,with  correction °sa»ikk in, 
the  reading  I  have  followed,  taking  saw^kkin  to  be  identical  with 
sakkin,  a  Prakrit  form  of  Sanskrit  sarpin. 

*  Ku«c/akalahgaka,  for  which  I  read  °kalahgaka. 


94  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  III. 

123.  Nobody  keeps  their  side^ ;  a  putrid  smell  is 
continually  issuing  from  their  mouths  ;  an  evil  spirit 
has  entered  the  body  of  those  who  do  not  believe  in 
this  supreme  enlightenment. 

124.  Needy,  obliged  to  do  menial  labour,  always 
in  another's  service,  feeble,  and  subject  to  many 
diseases  they  go  about  in  the  world,  unprotected. 

125.  The  man  whom  they  happen  to  serve  is 
unwilling  to  give  them  much,  and  what  he  gives  is 
soon  lost.     Such  is  the  fruit  of  sinfulness. 

126.  Even  the  best-prepared  medicaments,  admi- 
nistered to  them  by  able  men,  do,  under  those 
circumstances,  but  increase  their  illness,  and  the 
disease  has  no  end. 

127.  Some  commit  thefts,  affrays,  assaults,  or  acts 
of  hostility,  whereas  others  commit  robberies  of 
goods ;  (all  this)  befalls  the  sinner. 

128.  Never  does  he  behold  the  Lord  of  the  world, 
the  King  of  kings  ruling  the  earth  ^,  for  he  is  doomed 
to  live  at  a  wrong  time^,  he  who  scorns  my  Buddha- 
rule. 

129.  Nor  does  that  foolish  person  listen  to  the 
law ;  he  is  deaf  and  senseless ;  he  never  finds  rest, 
because  he  has  scorned  this  enlightenment. 

130.  During  many  hundred  thousand  myriads  of 
ko/is  of  ^ons  equal  to  the  sand  of  the  Ganges  he 
shall  be  dull  and  defective ;  that  is  the  evil  result 
from  scorning  this  Sutra. 

^  Apratyanika,  var.  lect.  apratyaniya.  The  rendering  is 
doubtful.  I  take  it  to  be  synonymous  with  apaksha;  cf.  note, 
p.  17. 

^  Mahi,  i.e.  Sansk.  mahim. 

^  In  the  darkness  of  hell,  i.  e.  in  common  parlance,  at  night- 
time, when  nobody  can  behold  the  sun. 


III.  A    PARABLE.  95 

131.  Hell  is  his  garden  (or  monastery),  a  place 
of  misfortune^  his  abode;  he  is  continually  living 
amongst  asses,  hogs,  jackals,  and  dogs. 

132.  And  when  he  has  assumed  a  human  shape 
he  is  to  be  blind,  deaf,  and  stupid,  the  servant  of 
another,  and  always  poor. 

133.  Diseases,  myriads  of  ko/is  of  wounds  on  the 
body,  scab,  itch,  scurf,  leprosy,  blotch,  a  foul  smell 
are,  in  that  condition,  his  covering  and  apparel. 

134.  His  sight  is  dim  to  distinguish  the  real. 
His  anger  appears  mighty  in  him,  and  his  passion 
is  most  violent;  he  always  delights  in  animal 
wombs. 

135-  Were  I  to  go  on,  6ariputra,  for  a  whole 
/Eon,  enumerating  the  evils  of  him  who  shall  scorn 
my  S^tra,  I  should  not  come  to  an  end. 

136.  And  since  I  am  fully  aware  of  it,  I  com- 
mand thee,  ^ariputra,  that  thou  shalt  not  expound  a 
Siatra  like  this  before  foolish  people. 

137.  But  those  who  are  sensible,  instructed, 
thoughtful,  clever,  and  learned,  who  strive  after 
the  highest  supreme  enlightenment,  to  them  ex- 
pound its  real  meaning. 

138.  Those  who  have  seen  many  ko/is  of  Bud- 
dhas,  planted  immeasurably  many  roots  of  good- 
ness, and  undertaken  a  strong  vow,  to  them  expound 
its  real  meaning. 

139.  Those  who,  full  of  energy  and  ever  kind- 
hearted,  have  a  long  time  been  developing  the 
feeling  of  kindness,  have  given  up  body  and  life, 
in  their  presence  thou  mayst  preach  this  Sutra. 


^  A  pay  a,  properly  'going  away,  disappearance,'  the  reverse  of 
upaya,  'approaching.' 


96  SADDHARMA-PUiVZ^ARIKA.  III. 

140.  Those  who  show  mutual  love  and  respect, 
keep  no  intercourse  with  ignorant  people,  and  are 
content  to  live  in  mountain  caverns,  to  them  expound 
this  hallowed  Sutra. 

141.  If  thou  see  sons  of  Buddha  who  attach  them- 
selves to  virtuous  friends  and  avoid  bad  friends, 
then  reveal  to  them  this  Sutra. 

142.  Those  sons  of  Buddha  who  have  not  broken 
the  moral  vows,  are  pure  like  gems  and  jewels,  and 
devoted  to  the  study  of  the  great  Statras,  before 
those  thou  mayst  propound  this  Sutra. 

143.  Those  who  are  not  irascible,  ever  sincere, 
full  of  compassion  for  all  living  beings,  and  respect- 
ful towards  the  Sugata,  before  those  thou  mayst 
propound  this  Sutra. 

144.  To  one  who  in  the  congregation,  without 
any  hesitation  and  distraction  of  mind,  speaks  to 
expound  the  law,  with  many  myriads  of  ko/is  of 
illustrations,  thou  mayst  manifest  this  Sutra. 

145.  And  he  who,  desirous  of  acquiring  all-know- 
ingness,  respectfully  lifts  his  joined  hands  to  his 
head,  or  who  seeks  in  all  directions  to  find  some 
monk  of  sacred  eloquence ; 

146.  And  he  who  keeps  (in  memory)  the  great 
Sutras,  while  he  never  shows  any  liking  for  other 
books,  nor  even  knows  a  single  stanza  from  another 
work ;  to  all  of  them  thou  mayst  expound  this 
sublime  Sutra. 

147.  He  who  seeks  such  an  excellent  Sutra  as 
this,  and  after  obtaining  it  devoutly  worships  it,  is 
like  the  man  who  wears  a  relic  of  the  Tatha^ata  he 
has  eagerly  sought  for. 

148.  Never  mind  other  Sutras  nor  other  books 
in  which  a  profane  philosophy  is  taught ;  such  books 


III.  A    PARABLE.  97 

are  fit  for  the  foolish ;  avoid  them  and  preach  this 
SCltra. 

149.  During  a  full  ^on,  ^'arlputra,  I  could  speak 
of  thousands  of  ko/is  of  (connected)  points,  (but 
this  suffices) ;  thou  mayst  reveal  this  Sutra  to  all 
who  are  striving  after  the  highest  supreme  en- 
lightenment. 


[21]  H 


98  SADDHARMA-PUJVDARiKA.  TV. 


CHAPTER'^  IV. 

DISPOSITION. 

As  the  venerable  Subh{iti,  the  venerable  Mahd- 
Katydyana,  the  venerable  Maha  -  Ka^-yapa,  and 
the  venerable  Maha -Man dgalyayana  heard  this 
law  unheard  of  before,  and  as  from  the  mouth 
of  the  Lord  they  heard  the  future  destiny  of 
K^ariputra  to  superior  perfect  enlightenment,  they 
were  struck  with  wonder,  amazement,  and  rapture. 
They  instantly  rose  from  their  seats  and  went  up 
to  the  place  where  the  Lord  was  sitting;  after 
throwing  their  cloak  over  one  shoulder,  fixing  the 
right  knee  on  the  ground  and  lifting  up  their  joined 
hands  before  the  Lord,  looking  up  to  him,  their 
bodies  bent,  bent  down  and  inclined,  they  addressed 
the  Lord  in  this  strain  : 

Lord,  we  are  old,  aged,  advanced  in  years ; 
honoured  as  seniors  in  this  assemblage  of  monks. 
Worn  out  by  old  age  we  fancy  that  we  have 
attained  Nirva;2a ;  we  make  no  efforts,  O  Lord, 
for  supreme  perfect  enlightenment ;  our  force  and 
exertion  are  inadequate  to  it.  Though  the  Lord 
preaches  the  law  and  has  long  continued  sitting,  and 
though  we  have  attended  to  that  preaching  of  the 
law,  yet,  O  Lord,  as  we  have  so  long  been  sitting 
and  so  long  attended  the  Lord's  service,  our 
greater  and  minor  members,  as  well  as  the  joints 
and  articulations,  begin  to  ache.  Hence,  O  Lord, 
we  are  unable,  in  spite  of  the  Lord's  preaching,  to 


IV.  DISPOSITION.  99 

realise  the  fact  that  all  is  vanity  (or  void),  purpose- 
less (or  causeless,  or  unconditioned),  and  unfixed  ^ ;  we 
have  conceived  no  longing  after  the  Buddha-laws,  the 
divisions  ofthe  Buddha-fields,  the  sports  ^  of  the  Bodhi- 
sattvas  or  Tathagatas.  For  by  having  fled  out  of  the 
triple  world,  O  Lord,  we  imagined  having  attained 
Nirva;^a,  and  we  are  decrepit  from  old  age.  Hence, 
O  Lord,  though  we  have  exhorted  other  Bodhisattvas 
and  instructed  them  in  supreme  perfect  enlighten- 
ment, we  have  in  doing  so  never  conceived  a  single 
thought  of  longing.  And  just  now,  O  Lord,  we  are 
hearing  from  the  Lord  that  disciples  also  may  be 
predestined  to  supreme  perfect  enlightenment.  We 
are  astonished  and  amazed,  and  deem  it  a  great 
gain,  O  Lord,  that  to-day,  on  a  sudden,  we  have 
heard  from  the  Lord  a  voice  such  as  we  never  heard 
before.  We  have  acquired  a  magnificent  jewel,  O 
Lord,  an  incomparable  jewel.  We  had  not  sought, 
nor  searched,  nor  expected,  nor  required  so  mag- 
nificent a  jewel.  It  has  become  clear  to  us^,  O 
Lord ;  it  has  become  clear  to  us,  O  Sugata. 

It  is  a  case,  O  Lord,  as   if  a  certain  man  went 


^  Sunyatanimittapra«ihita»i  sarvam.  The  commentary  on 
Dhammapada,  ver.  92  (p.  281),  gives  an  explanation  of  the  Pali 
terms  sunnzta.,  animitta,  and  appawihita.  His  interpretation 
is  too  artificial  to  be  of  much  use.  In  the  verse  referred  to  we 
find  sunnzta.  apparently  as  an  adjective,  but  till  we  find  such 
an  adjective  in  another  place,  it  is  safer  to  doubt  its  existence 
altogether.  Apra«ihita  is,  to  my  apprehension,  unfixed,  not 
fixed  beforehand,  not  determined  providentially ;  it  may  also  mean 
unpremeditated. 

2  Or,  display  of  magical  phenomena. 

^  Pratibhati  no  ;  a  would-be  correction  has  pratilabhino, 
which  is  inadmissible,  because  with  this  reading  the  pronoun 
vayam  cannot  be  left  out. 

H    2 


lOO  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  IV. 


away  from  his  father  and  betook  himself  to   some 
other  place.     He   lives  there  in  foreign  parts  for 
many  years,  twenty  or  thirty  or  forty  or  fifty.     In 
course  of  time  the  one  (the  father)  becomes  a  great 
man ;  the  other  (the  son)  is  poor ;  in  seeking  a  live- 
lihood for  the  sake  of  food  and  clothing  he  roams  in 
all  directions  and  goes  to  some  place,  whereas  his 
father  removes  to  another  country.     The  latter  has 
much  wealth,  gold,  corn  \  treasures,  and  granaries ; 
possesses   much    (wrought)    gold   and  silver,  many 
gems,  pearls,  lapis  lazuli,  conch  shells,  and  stones (?), 
corals,    gold    and    silver;     many   slaves    male   and 
female,  servants  for  menial  work  and  journeymen ; 
is   rich    in   elephants,    horses,  carriages,  cows,  and 
sheep.     He  keeps  a  large  retinue;  has  his  money 
invested    in    great     territories  2,    and    does    great 
things  in  business,  money-lending,  agriculture,  and 
commerce. 

In  course  of  time,  Lord,  that  poor  man,  in  quest  of 
food  and  clothing,  roaming  through  villages,  towns, 
boroughs,  provinces,  kingdoms,  and  royal  capitals, 
reaches  the  place  where  his  father,  the  owner  of 
much  wealth  and  gold,  treasures  and  granaries,  is 
residing.  Now  the  poor  man's  father.  Lord,  the 
owner  of  much  wealth  and  gold,  treasures  and 
granaries,  who  was  residing  in  that  town,  had 
always  and  ever  been  thinking  of  the  son  he  had 
lost  fifty  years  ago,  but  he  gave  no  utterance  to 
his  thoughts  before  others,  and  was  only  pining  in 
himself  and  thinking:    I    am   old,   aged,    advanced 


^  Dhanya,  wanting  in  some  MSS. 

"^  Maha^anapadeshu  dhanika//.    The  translation  is  doubtful ; 
the  words  may  as  well  mean,  a  creditor  of  people  at  large. 


IV.  DISPOSITION.  lOI 

in  years,  and  possess  abundance  of  bullion,  gold, 
money  and  corn,  treasures  and  granaries,  but  have 
no  son.  It  is  to  be  feared  lest  death  shall  overtake 
me  and  all  this  perish  unused.  Repeatedly  he  was 
thinking  of  that  son  :  O  how  happy  should  I  be, 
were  my  son  to  enjoy  this  mass  of  wealth ! 

Meanwhile,  Lord,  the  poor  man  in  search  of  food 
and  clothing  was  gradually  approaching  the  house  of 
the  rich  man,  the  owner  of  abundant  bullion,  gold, 
money  and  corn,  treasures  and  granaries.  And  the 
father  of  the  poor  man  happened  to  sit  at  the  door 
of  his  house,  surrounded  and  waited  upon  by  a  great 
crowd  of  Brahmans,  Kshatriyas,  Vai^yas,  and  ^Sudras; 
he  was  sittine  on  a  masfnificent  throne  with  a  foot- 
stool  decorated  with  gold  and  silver,  while  dealing 
with  hundred  thousands  of  ko/Is  of  gold-pieces,  and 
fanned  with  a  chowrie,  on  a  spot  under  an  extended 
awning  Inlaid  with  pearls  and  flowers  and  adorned 
with  hanging  garlands  of  jewels;  sitting  (in  short)  In 
great  pomp.  The  poor  man.  Lord,  saw  his  own 
father  in  such  pomp  sitting  at  the  door  of  the 
house,  surrounded  with  a  great  crowd  of  people 
and  doing  a  householder's  business.  The  poor  man 
frightened,  terrified,  alarmed,  seized  with  a  feeling 
of  horripilation  all  over  the  body,  and  agitated  in 
mind,  reflects  thus :  Unexpectedly  have  I  here 
fallen  in  with  a  king  or  grandee.  People  like  me 
have  nothing  to  do  here ;  let  me  go ;  in  the  street 
of  the  poor  I  am  likely  to  find  food  and  clothing 
without  much  difficulty.  Let  me  no  longer  tarry  at 
this  place,  lest  I  be  taken  to  do  forced  labour  or 
incur  some  other  Injury. 

Thereupon,  Lord,  the  poor  man  quickly  departs, 
runs  off,  does  not  tarry  from  fear   of  a  series  of 


I02  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARiKA.  IV. 

supposed  dangers.  But  the  rich  man,  sitting  on 
the  throne  at  the  door  of  his  mansion,  has  recog- 
nised his  son  at  first  sight,  in  consequence  whereof 
he  is  content,  in  high  spirits,  charmed,  delighted, 
filled  with  joy  and  cheerfulness.  He  thinks  :  Won- 
derful !  he  who  is  to  enjoy  this  plenty  of  bullion, 
gold,  money  and  corn,  treasures  and  granaries,  has 
been  found!  He  of  whom  I  have  been  thinking 
again  and  again,  is  here  now  that  I  am  old,  aged, 
advanced  in  years. 

At  the  same  time,  moment,  and  instant,  Lord,  he 
despatches  couriers,  to  whom  he  says  :  Go,  sirs,  and 
quickly  fetch  me  that  man.  The  fellows  thereon 
all  run  forth  in  full  speed  and  overtake  the  poor 
man,  who,  frightened,  terrified,  alarmed,  seized  with 
a  feeling  of  horripilation  all  over  his  body,  agitated 
in  mind,  utters  a  lamentable  cry  of  distress,  screams, 
and  exclaims  :  I  have  given  you  no  offence.  But 
the  fellows  drag  the  poor  man,  however  lamenting, 
violently  with  them.  He,  frightened,  terrified, 
alarmed,  seized  with  a  feeling  of  horripilation  all 
over  his  body,  and  agitated  in  mind,  thinks  by 
himself :  I  fear  lest  I  shall  be  punished  with  capital 
punishment^;  I  am  lost.  He  faints  away,  and  falls 
on  the  earth.  His  father  dismayed  and  near  de- 
spondency ^  says  to  those  fellows:  Do  not  carry ^  the 


^  According  to  the  reading  vadhyadaw^ya-^.  If  we  read 
vadhyo  da«^ya/^,  the  rendering  would  be,  executed  or  punished 
(fined).     Cf.  stanza  19  below. 

^  Yish&nna.skz  sadasanne  /^asya  sa  pita  bhavet;  var.  lect. 
V. syad  asanna^-y^a  /^asya  s.  p.  b.  Both  readings  are  corrupt;  we 
have  to  read  sadasannaj-zi'a.  The  final  e  of  asanne  is  likely  to 
be  a  remnant  of  the  original  Magadhi  (not  Pali)  text,  the  e  being 
the  noni.  case  sing,  of  masculine  words  in  a. 

^  Mi  bhavanta  enam  (var.  lect.  evaw)  purusham  ayishur 


IV.  DISPOSITION.  103 

man  in  that  manner.  With  these  words  he  sprinkles 
him  with  cold  water  without  addressing  him  any 
further.  For  that  householder  knows  the  poor 
man's  humble  disposition  ^  and  his  own  elevated 
position ;    yet  he  feels  that  the  man  is  his  son. 

The  householder,  Lord,  skilfully  conceals  from 
every  one  that  it  is  his  son.  He  calls  one  of  his 
servants  and  says  to  him :  Go,  sirrah,  and  tell  that 
poor  man :  Go,  sirrah,  whither  thou  likest ;  thou  art 
free.  The  servant  obeys,  approaches  the  poor  man 
and  tells  him  :  Go,  sirrah,  whither  thou  likest ;  thou 
art  free.  The  poor  man  is  astonished  and  amazed 
at  hearing  these  words ;  he  leaves  that  spot  and 
wanders  to  the  street  of  the  poor  in  search  of  food 
and  clothing.  In  order  to  attract  him  the  house- 
holder practises  an  able  device^  He  employs  for  it 
two  men  ill-favoured  and  of  little  splendour  ^  Go, 
says  he,  go  to  the  man  you  saw  in  this  place ;  hire 
him  in  your  own  name  for  a  double  daily  fee,  and 
order  him  to  do  work  here  in  my  house.  And  if  he 
asks  ;  What  work  shall  I  have  to  do  ?  tell  him  : 
Help  us  in  clearing  the   heap  of  dirt.     The  two 

(van  lect.  anayeyur)  iti.  A  would-be  correction  has  anayata, 
at  any  rate  a  blunder,  because  anayantu  would  be  required.  The 
original  reading  may  have  been  anayishur,  in  common  Sanskrit 
anaishur.  Quite  different  is  the  reading,  atha  khalu  sa  daridra- 
purusham  anayantv  iti  tarn  Qna.m  jitalena,  &c., '  thereupon 
he  (the  rich  man)  ordered  the  poor  man  to  be  brought  before  him 
and,'  &c. 

^  Here  and  repeatedly  in  the  sequel  the  term  hinadhimuk- 
tata  would  much  better  be  rendered  by  '  humble  or  low  position.' 

2  Durvarwav  alpau^askau.  The  idiomatic  meaning  of  dur- 
varwa  a.  is  'having  a  bad  complexion  or  colour  (e.g.  from  ill 
health)  and  Uttle  vitality  or  vigour.'  The  artificial  or  so-called 
etymological  meaning  may  be, '  of  bad  caste  and  of  little  splendour 
or  majesty;'  see,  however,  below  at  stanza  21. 


104  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARlKA.  IV. 

fellows  go  and  seek  the  poor  man  and  engage  him 
for  such  work  as  mentioned.  Thereupon  the  two 
fellows  conjointly  with  the  poor  man  clear  the  heap 
of  dirt  in  the  house  for  the  daily  pay  they  receive 
from  the  rich  man,  while  they  take  up  their  abode 
in  a  hovel  of  straw  ^  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the 
rich  man's  dwelling.  And  that  rich  man  beholds 
through  a  window  his  own  son  clearing  the  heap  of 
dirt,  at  which  sight  he  is  anew  struck  with  wonder 
and  astonishment. 

Then  the  householder  descends  from  his  mansion, 
lays  off  his  wreath  and  ornaments,  parts  with  his 
soft,  clean,  and  gorgeous  attire,  puts  on  dirty  rai- 
ment, takes  a  basket  in  his  right  hand,  smears  his 
body  with  dust,  and  goes  to  his  son,  whom  he 
greets  from  afar,  and  thus  addresses :  Please,  take 
the  baskets  and  without  delay  remove  the  dust.  By 
this  device  he  manages  to  speak  to  his  son,  to  have 
a  talk  with  him  and  say  :  Do,  sirrah,  remain  here  in 
my  service ;  do  not  go  again  to  another  place  ;  I 
will  give  thee  extra  pay,  and  whatever  thou  wantest 
thou  mayst  confidently  ask  me,  be  it  the  price  of  a 
pot,  a  smaller  pot,  a  boiler  or  wood  2,  or  be  it  the 

^  The  MSS.  vary  considerably,  and  are  moreover  inconsistent 
in  their  readings  of  this  word.  One  has  gr/haparisare  ka/a- 
pallikuM/^ikaya;  another,  g.  kapa/aliku/ikayaw  (r.  ka/apali° 
or  ka/opaIi°);  a  third,  grz'hapatisakare  (mere  nonsense  for 
grz'haparisare)  ka/apaliku?1/('ikayaw2.  Paliku/ika  is  evi- 
dently a  variation  of  upariku/i,  pali  being  a  Magadhi  form  for 
pari,  or  the  Prakrit  of  prati  or  pari.  The  11  is  clearly  wrong. 
Ka/a  may  mean  mat,  straw,  and  boards. 

^  The  rendering  of  this  passage  is  doubtful.  Burnouf  takes  the 
words  pot  (ku«(/a),  small  pot  (ku?;fl'ika),  boiler  (sthalika),  and 
kash///a  to  denote  measures.  He  may  be  right,  though  in  the 
absence  of  sufficient  evidence  for  kash//za  denoting  a  measure  or 
value,  I  thought  it  safer  to  take  the  word  in  the  usual  sense. 


IV.  DISPOSITION.  105 


price  of  salt,  food,  or  clothing.  I  have  got  an  old 
cloak,  man ;  if  thou  shouldst  want  it,  ask  me  for  it, 
I  will  give  it.  Any  utensil  of  such  sort\  when  thou 
wantest  to  have  it,  I  will  give  thee.  Be  at  ease, 
fellow ;  look  upon  me  as  if  I  were  thy  father,  for  I 
am  older  and  thou  art  younger,  and  thou  hast  ren- 
dered me  much  service  by  clearing  this  heap  of  dirt, 
and  as  long  as  thou  hast  been  in  my  service  thou 
hast  never  shown  nor  art  showing  wickedness, 
crookedness,  arrogance,  or  hypocrisy;  I  have  dis- 
covered in  thee  no  vice  at  all  of  such  as  are  com- 
monly seen  in  other  man-servants.  From  hence- 
forward thou  art  to  me  like  my  own  son. 

From  that  time.  Lord,  the  householder,  addresses 
the  poor  man  by  the  name  of  son,  and  the  latter 
feels  in  presence  of  the  householder  as  a  son  to 
his  father.  In  this  manner,  Lord,  the  householder 
affected  with  longing  for  his  son  employs  him  for 
the  clearing  of  the  heap  of  dirt  during  twenty  years, 
at  the  end  of  which  the  poor  man  feels  quite  at  ease 
in  the  mansion  to  go  in  and  out,  though  he  continues 
taking  his  abode  in  the  hovel  of  straw  2. 

After  a  while.  Lord,  the  householder  falls  sick, 
and  feels  that  the  time  of  his  death  is  near  at  hand. 
He  says  to  the  poor  man :  Come  hither,  man,  I  pos- 
sess abundant  bullion,  gold,  money  and  corn,  treasures 
and  granaries.  I  am  very  sick,  and  wish  to  have  one 
upon  whom  to  bestow  (my  wealth) ;  by  whom  it  is  to 
be  received,  and  with  whom  it  is  to  be  deposited  ^ 
Accept  it.     For  in  the  same  manner  as  I  am  the 

^  It  seems  to  me  that  this  refers  to  knndz,  &c. 
2  Here  ka/apalikuw/C'e,  van  lect.ka/akapalliku?~/('e  andka/a- 
pa/ikufi/^ikayam. 

^  MSS.  ya-^-^a  nidhatavyam;  we  have  to  read  yatra  n°. 


I06  SADDHARMA-PUiVHARIKA.  IV. 

owner  of  it,  so  art  thou,  but  thou  shah  not  suffer 
anything  of  it  to  be  wasted. 

And  so,  Lord,  the  poor  man  accepts  the  abundant 
bulhon,  gqld,  money  and  corn,  treasures  and  grana- 
ries of  the  rich  man,  but  for  himself  he  is  quite 
indifferent  to  it,  and  requires  nothing  from  it,  not 
even  so  much  as  the  price  of  a  prastha  of  flour ;  he 
continues  hvinor  in  the  same  hovel  of  straw  and 
considers  himself  as  poor  as  before. 

After  a  while.  Lord,  the  householder  perceives 
that  his  son  is  able  to  save,  mature  and  mentally 
developed  ;  that  in  the  consciousness  of  his  nobility 
he  feels  abashed,  ashamed,  disgusted,  when  thinking 
of  his  former  poverty.  The  time  of  his  death 
approaching,  he  sends  for  the  poor  man,  presents 
him  to  a  gathering  of  his  relations,  and  before  the 
king  or  king's  peer  and  in  the  presence  of  citizens 
and  country-people  makes  the  following  speech : 
Hear,  gentlemen !  this  is  my  own  son,  by  me  begot- 
ten. It  is  now  fifty  years  that  he  disappeared  from 
such  and  such  a  town.  He  is  called  so  and  so,  and 
myself  am  called  so  and  so.  In  searching  after  him 
I  have  from  that  town  come  hither.  He  is  my  son, 
I  am  his  father.  To  him  I  leave  all  my  revenues^, 
and  all  my  personal  (or  private)  wealth  shall  he 
acknowledge  (his  own). 

The  poor  man,  Lord,  hearing  this  speech  was 
astonished  and  amazed ;  he  thought  by  himself : 
Unexpectedly  have  I  obtained  this  bullion,  gold, 
money  and  corn,  treasures  and  granaries. 

Even  so,  O  Lord,  do  we  represent  the  sons  of  the 

^  The  terms  used  in  the  text  are,  remarkably  enough,  yz.h 
kajy^in  mamopabhogo 'sti,  which  seems  to  differ  from  the  fol- 
lowing ya-^-^a  me  ki«/('id  asti  pratyatmaka;/^  dhana»/. 


IV.  DISPOSITION.  107 

Tathagata,  and  the  Tathagata  says  to  us :  Ye  are 
my  sons,  as  the  householder  did.  We  were 
oppressed,  O  Lord,  with  three  difficukles,  viz.  the 
difficuhy  of  pain,  the  difficuky  of  conceptions  \  the 
difficulty  of  transition  (or  evolution) ;  and  in  the 
worldly  whirl  we  were  disposed  to  what  is  low  2. 
Then  have  we  been  prompted  by  the  Lord  to  ponder 
on  the  numerous  inferior  laws  (or  conditions,  things) 
that  are  similar  to  a  heap  of  dirt.  Once  directed  to 
them  we  have  been  practising,  making  efforts,  and 
seekinof  for  nothing:  but  Nirva/^a  as  our  fee^.  We 
were  content,  O  Lord,  with  the  Nirva;^a  obtained, 
and  thought  to  have  gained  much  at  the  hands  of 
the  Tathagata  because  of  our  having  applied  our- 
selves to  these  laws,  practised,  and  made  efforts. 
But  the  Lord  takes  no  notice  of  us,  does  not  mix 
with  us,  nor  tell  us  that  this  treasure  of  the  Tatha- 
gata's  knowledge  shall  belong  to  us,  though  the 
Lord  skilfully  appoints  us  as  heirs  to  this  treasure 
of  the  knowledge  of  the  Tathagata.  And  we,  O  Lord, 
are  not  (impatiently)  longing  to  enjoy  it,  because  we 
deem  it  a  great  gain  already  to  receive  from  the 
Lord  Nirva;2a  as  our  fee.  We  preach  to  the  Bodhi- 
sattvas  Mahasattvas  a  sublime  sermon  about  the 
knowledge  of  the  Tathagata;  we  explain,  show, 
demonstrate  the  knowledge  of  the  Tathagata,  O 
Lord,  without  longing.  For  the  Tathagata  by  his 
skilfulness  knows  our  disposition,  whereas  we  our- 
selves do  not  know,  nor  apprehend.   It  is  for  this  very 

^  Sa;?zskara,  which  also  means '  (transitory)  impressions  (mental 
and  moral).' 

2  Hinadhimukta. 

^  Divasamudra,  implying  the  notion  of  the  fee  being  paid  at 
the  end  of  the  day. 


I08  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARiKA.  IV. 

reason  that  the  Lord  just  now  tells  us  that  we  are  to 
him  as  sons  \  and  that  he  reminds  us  of  beinof  heirs 
to  the  Tathagata.  For  the  case  stands  thus :  we 
are  as  sons^  to  the  Tathagata,  but  low  (or  humble) 
of  disposition^;  the  Lord  perceives  the  strength  of 
our  disposition  and  applies  to  us  the  denomination 
of  Bodhisattvas ;  we  are,  however,  charged  with  a 
double  office  in  so  far  as  in  presence  of  Bodhisattvas 
we  are  called  persons  of  low  disposition  and  at  the 
same  time  have  to  rouse  them  to  Buddha-enlighten- 
ment. Knowing  the  strength  of  our  disposition  the 
Lord  has  thus  spoken,  and  in  this  way,  O  Lord,  do 
we  say  that  we  have  obtained  unexpectedly  and 
without  longing  the  jewel  of  omniscience,  which  we 
did  not  desire,  nor  seek,  nor  search  after,  nor  expect, 
nor  require ;  and  that  inasmuch  as  we  are  the  sons 
of  the  Tathagata. 

On  that  occasion  the  venerable  Maha-KaJ"yapa 
uttered  the  following  stanzas: 

1.  We  are  stricken  with  wonder,  amazement,  and 
rapture  at  hearing  a  voice  ^;  it  is  the  lovely  voice,  the 
leader's  voice,  that  so  unexpectedly  we  hear  to-day. 

2.  In  a  short  moment  we  have  acquired  a  great 
heap  of  precious  jewels  such  as  we  were  not  think- 
ing of,  nor  requiring.  All  of  us  are  astonished  to 
hear  it. 

3.  It  is  like  (the  history  of)  a  young ^  person  who, 
seduced  by  foolish  people,  went  away  from  his  father 
and  wandered  to  another  country  far  distant. 

*  And,  the  Lord's  real  sons.      -  And,  the  Tathagata's  real  sons. 

^  Rather,  position.  *  Or  call. 

^  Bala,  the  word  used  in  the  text,  may  mean  young  as  well  as 
ignorant  and  foolish.  Burnouf  translates  bala^anena  by  '  par  une 
troupe  d'enfants.' 


IV.  DISPOSITION.  109 


4.  The  father  was  sorry  to  perceive  that  his  son 
had  run  away  and  in  his  sorrow  roamed  the  country 
in  all  directions  during  no  less  than  fifty  years. 

5.  In  search  of  his  son  he  came  to  some  great 
city,  where  he  built  a  house  and  dwelt,  blessed  with 
all  that  can  gratify  the  five  senses. 

6.  He  had  plenty  of  bullion  and  gold,  money  and 
corn,  conch  shells,  stones  (?),  and  coral ;  elephants, 
horses,  and  footboys  ;  cows,  cattle,  and  sheep  ; 

7.  Interests,  revenues,  landed  properties ;  male 
and  female  slaves  and  a  great  number  of  servants ; 
was  highly  honoured  by  thousands  of  ko/is  and  a 
constant  favourite  of  the  kind's. 

8.  The  citizens  bow  to  him  with  joined  hands,  as 
well  as  the  villagers  in  the  rural  districts;  many 
merchants  come  to  him,  (and)  persons  charged  with 
numerous  affairs  \ 

9.  In  such  way  the  man  becomes  wealthy,  but  he 
gets  old,  aged,  advanced  in  years,  and  he  passes 
days  and  nights  always  sorrowful  in  mind  on  account 
of  his  son. 

10.  '  It  is  fifty  years  since  that  foolish  son  has  run 
away.  I  have  got  plenty  of  wealth  and  the  hour  of 
my  death  draws  near,' 

11.  Meanwhile  that  foolish  son  is  wanderingf  from 
village  to  village,  poor  and  miserable,  seeking  food 
and  clothing. 

1 2.  When  begging,  he  at  one  time  gets  something, 
another  time  he  does  not.  He  grows  lean  in  his 
travels  ^  the  unwise  boy,  while  his  body  is  vitiated 
with  scabs  and  itch. 


^  Bahuhi  karyehi  kr/tadhikara/5. 

"^  For  parasaraweshu  of  the  MSS.,  I  read  parisaraweshu, 


no  SADDHARMA-PUA^DARIKA.  IV. 


13.  In  course  of  time  he  in  his  rovings  reaches 
the  town  where  his  father  is  Hving,  and  comes  to  his 
father's  mansion  to  beg  for  food  and  raiment. 

14.  And  the  wealthy,  rich  man  happens  to  sit  at 
the  door  on  a  throne  under  a  canopy  expanded 
in  the  sky  and  surrounded  with  many  hundreds  of 
living  beings. 

15.  His  trustees  stand  round  him,  some  of  them 
counting  money  and  bullion,  some  writing  bills, 
some  lending  money  on  interest. 

16.  The  poor  man,  seeing  the  splendid  mansion 
of  the  householder,  thinks  within  himself:  Where 
am  I  here  ?  This  man  must  be  a  king  or  a 
grandee. 

1 7.  Let  me  not  incur  some  injury  and  be  caught 
to  do  forced  labour.  With  these  reflections  he 
hurried  away  Inquiring  after  the  road  to  the  street 
of  the  poor. 

18.  The  rich  man  on  the  throne  is  glad  to  see 
his  own  son,  and  despatches  messengers  with  the 
order  to  fetch  that  poor  man. 

19.  The  messengers  immediately  seize  the  man, 
but  he  is  no  sooner  caught  than  he  faints  away  (as  he 
thinks) :  These  are  certainly  executioners  who  have 
approached  me ;  what  do  I  want  clothing  or  food  ? 

20.  On  seeing  it,  the  rich,  sagacious  man  (thinks): 
This  ignorant  and  stupid  person  is  of  low  disposi- 
tion and  will  have  no  faith  in  my  magnificence  ^,  nor 
believe  that  I  am  his  father. 

21.  Under  those  circumstances  he  orders  persons 

a  word  known  from  classic  Sanskrit  and  not  wanting  in  Buddhistic 
Sanskrit,  as  appears  from  Lalita-vistara,  p.  39. 

^  Or,  have  no  hking  for  my  magnificence ;  the  term  used  in  the 
text,  jraddadhati,  admitting  of  both  interpretations. 


IV.  DISPOSITION.  I  1 1 

of  low  character,  crooked,  one-eyed,  maimed,  ill-clad, 
and  blackish  ^  to  go  and  search  that  man  who  shall 
do  menial  work. 

22.  '  Enter  my  service  and  cleanse  the  putrid  heap 
of  dirt,  replete  with  faeces  and  urine  ;  I  will  give  thee 
a  double  salary'  (are  the  words  of  the  message). 

2'^.  On  hearing  this  call  the  poor  man  comes  and 
cleanses  the  said  spot ;  he  takes  up  his  abode  there 
in  a  hoveP  near  the  mansion. 

24.  The  rich  man  continually  observes  him 
through  the  windows  (and  thinks):  There  is  my 
son  engaged  in  a  low  occupation  ^,  cleansing  the 
heap  of  dirt. 

25.  Then  he  descends,  takes  a  basket,  puts  on 
dirty  garments,  and  goes  near  the  man.  He  chides 
him,  saying :  Thou  dost  not  perform  thy  work. 

26.  I  will  give  thee  double  salary  and  twice  more 
ointment  for  the  feet ;  I  will  give  thee  food  with  salt, 
potherbs,  and,  besides,  a  cloak. 

27.  So  he  chides  him  at  the  time,  but  afterwards 
he  wisely  conciliates  *  him  (by  saying) :  Thou  dost 
thy  work  very  well,  indeed;  thou  art  my  son,  surely; 
there  is  no  doubt  of  it. 

28.  Little  by  little  he  makes  the  man  enter  the 
house,  and  employs  him  in  his  service  for  fully 
twenty  years,  in  the  course  of  which  time  he  suc- 
ceeds in  inspiring  him  with  confidence. 

29.  At  the  same  time  he  lays  up  in  the  house 

^  It  is  with  this  word,  kr?'sh;^aka,  that  durvar«a  above,  p.  103, 
must  agree. 

2  Here  nivejanasyopaliku7i/('ake,  van  lect. ''kuft^ike. 

^  Hinadhimukta;  one  might  render  it,  'placed  in  a  low  or 
humble  position,'  but  '  disposition '  would  seem  out  of  place. 

*  Sawzjleshayate. 


112  SADDHARMA-PUA^JDARiKA.  IV. 


gold,  pearls,  and  crystal,  draws  up  the  sum  total, 
and  is  always  occupied  in  his  mind  with  all  that 
property. 

30.  The  ignorant  man,  who  is  living  outside  the 
mansion,  alone  in  a  hovel,  cherishes  no  other  ideas 
but  of  poverty,  and  thinks  to  himself :  Mine  are  no 
such  possessions! 

31.  The  rich  man  perceiving  this  of  him  (thinks): 
My  son  has  arrived  at  the  consciousness  of  being 
noble.  He  calls  together  a  gathering  of  his  friends 
and  relatives  (and  says) :  I  will  give  all  my  property 
to  this  man. 

32.  In  the  midst  of  the  assembly  where  the  king, 
burghers,  citizens,  and  many  merchantmen  were 
present,  he  speaks  thus  :  This  is  my  son  whom 
I  lost  a  long  time  ago. 

33.  It  is  now  fully  fifty  years — and  twenty  years 
more  during  which  I  have  seen  him — that  he  dis- 
appeared from  such  and  such  a  place  and  that  in  his 
search  I  came  to  this  place. 

34.  He  is  owner  of  all  my  property;  to  him  I 
leave  it  all  and  entirely ;  let  him  do  with  it  what  he 
wants ;  I  give  him  my  whole  family  property. 

35.  And  the  (poor)  man  is  struck  with  surprise; 
remembering  his  former  poverty,  his  low  disposi- 
tion \  and  as  he  receives  those  good  things  of  his 
father's  and  the  family  property,  he  thinks:  Now 
am  I  a  happy  man. 

36.  In  like  manner  has  the  leader,  who  knows 
our  low  disposition  (or  position),  not  declared  to  us : 
'Ye  shall  become  Buddhas,'  but,  *Ye  are,  certainly, 
my  disciples  and  sons.' 


Rather,  position. 


IV.  DISFOSITION.  113 

'^'].  And  the  Lord  of  the  world  enjoins  us  :  Teach, 
Kai-yapa,  the  superior  path  to  those  that  strive  to 
attain  the  highest  summit  of  enhghtenment,  the 
path  by  following  which  they  are  to  become 
Buddhas. 

1%.  Being  thus  ordered  by  the  Sugata,  we  show 
the  path  to  many  Bodhisattvas  of  great  might  \  by 
means  of  myriads  of  ko/is  of  illustrations  and  proofs. 

39.  And  by  hearing  us  the  sons  of  6^ina  realise 
that  eminent  path  to  attain  enlightenment,  and  in 
that  case  receive  the  prediction  that  they  are  to 
become  Buddhas  in  this  world. 

40.  Such  is  the  work  we  are  doing  strenuously  ^ 
preserving  this  law-treasure  and  revealing  it  to  the 
sons  of  6^ina,  in  the  manner  of  that  man  who  had 
deserved  the  confidence  of  that  (other  man). 

41.  Yet,  though  we  diffuse  the  Buddha-treasure^ 
we  feel  ourselves  to  be  poor  ;  we  do  not  require  the 
knowledge  of  the  6"ina,  and  yet,  at  the  same  time, 
we  reveal  it. 

42.  We  fancy  an  individual  *  NIrva;^a ;  so  far,  no 
further  does  our  knowledge  reach  ;  nor  do  we  ever 
rejoice  at  hearing  of  the  divisions  of  Buddha-fields. 

43.  All  these  laws  are  faultless,  unshaken,  exempt 
from  destruction  and  commencement ;  but  there  is 
no  law  ^  in  them.  When  we  hear  this,  however,  we 
cannot  believe  ^. 

^  Mahabala ;  this  term  is  obviously  intended  to  be  synonymous 
with  mahasattva. 

2  Tayin,  which  here  I  have  ventured  to  render  by  'strenuous,' 
on  the  strength  of  Pa^zini  I,  3,  38,  where  we  learn  that  tayate,  like 
kramate,  denotes  making  progress,  going  on  successfully. 

^  One  MS.  ghosha,  call,  instead  of  kosha. 

*  I.  e.  separate.  ^  I.  e.  moral  law. 

^  And,  we  cannot  approve,  agree. 

[21]  I 


114  SADDHARMA-PUiVZ)ARIKA.  IV. 

44.  We  have  put  aside  all  aspiration  to  superior 
Buddha-knowledge  a  long  time  ago  ;  never  have  we 
devoted  ourselves  to  it.  This  is  the  last  and  decisive 
word  spoken  by  the  6^ina. 

45.  In  this  bodily  existence,  closing  with  Nirva;^a, 
we  have  continually  accustomed  our  thoughts  to 
the  void ;  we  have  been  released  from  the  evils 
of  the  triple  world  we  were  suffering  from,  and  have 
accomplished  the  command  of  the  6^ina. 

46.  To  whom(soever)  among  the  sons  of  Gma  who 
in  this  world  are  on  the  road  to  superior  enlighten- 
ment we  revealed  (the  law),  and  whatever  law  we 
taught,  we  never  had  any  predilection^  for  it. 

47.  And  the  Master  of  the  world,  the  Self-born 
one,  takes  no  notice  of  us,  waiting  his  time;  he  does 
not  explain  the  real  connection  of  the  things  -,  as  he 
is  testing  our  disposition. 

48.  Able  in  applying  devices  at  the  right  time, 
like  that  rich  man  (he  says)  :  '  Be  constant  in  sub- 
duing your  low  disposition,'  and  to  those  who  are 
subdued  he  gives  his  wealth. 

49.  It  is  a  very  difficult  task  which  the  Lord  of 
the  world  is  performing,  (a  task)  in  which  he  dis- 
plays his  skilfulness,  when  he  tames  his  sons  of 
low  disposition  and  thereupon  imparts  to  them  his 
knowledge. 

50.  On  a  sudden  have  we  to-day  been  seized  with 
surprise,  just  as  the  poor  man  who  acquired  riches ; 
now  for  the  first  time  have  we  obtained  the  fruit  under 
the  rule  of  Buddha,  (a  fruit)  as  excellent  as  faultless. 

51.  As  we  have  always  observed  the  moral  pre- 

^  Spr/ha.     One  may  also  translate,   'we  never  were  partial 
to  it.' 

^  Bhutapadarthasandhi. 


IV.  DISPOSITION.  I  1 5 

cepts  under  the  rule  of  the  Knower  of  the  world,  we 
now  receive  the  fruit  of  that  morality  which  we  have 
formerly  practised. 

52.  Now  have  we  obtained  the  egregious,  hal- 
lowed \  exalted,  and  perfect  fruit  of  our  having 
observed  an  excellent  and  pure  spiritual  life  under 
the  rule  of  the  Leader. 

53.  Now,  O  Lord,  are  we  disciples,  and  we  shall 
proclaim  supreme  enlightenment  everywhere,  reveal 
the  word  of  enlightenment,  by  which  we  are  formid- 
able disciples^. 

54.  Now  have  we  become  Arhats  ^  O  Lord ;  and 
deserving  of  the  worship  of  the  world,  including  the 
gods,  Maras  and  Brahmas,  in  short,  of  all  beings  ^ 

55.  Who  is  there,  even  were  he  to  exert  himself 
during  ko^is  of  y^ons,  able  to  thwart  thee,  who 
accomplishes  in  this  world  of  mortals  such  difficult 
things  as  those,  and  others  even  more  difficult  ^  ? 

^  -Santa,  also,  tranquil,  ever  free  from  disturbance. 

^  -S'ravaka  bhishmakalpa.  This  may  be  rendered  'disciples 
like  Bhishma.'  Now  it  is  well  known  from  the  Mahabharata  that 
Bhishma,  the  son  of  .Santanu,  was  a  great  hero  and  sage,  and  it  is 
by  no  means  impossible  that  the  word  used  in  the  text  contains  an 
allusion  to  that  celebrated  person.  According  to  the  dictionaries 
bhishma  occurs  as  an  epithet  of  Siva,. 

^  We  may  translate  it  by  '  saints,'  but  properly  arhat  means  any 
worthy,  a  master,  an  honoured  personage,  in  short,  Guru.  On 
comparing  the  Greek  apxav,  apxea-dai,  we  may  infer  that  one  of  the 
oldest  meanings  of  the  word  was  '  a  foregoer,'  and  in  a  restricted 
sense,  a  forefather,  a  departed  one,  an  ancestor,  so  that  the  becoming 
an  Arhat,  an  ancestor,  and  dying  comes  to  be  the  same.  The  promi- 
nent part  played  by  the  Arhats  is,  in  my  opinion,  a  remnant  of 
primeval  Pitr/-worship,  the  chiefest  of  the  ancestors  being  Dhar- 
marao-a,  Yama. 

*  It  is  difficult  not  to  perceive  the  true  meaning  of  such  passages. 

'  This  passage  is  still  more  explicit,  if  possible,  than  the  former. 

I    2 


I  1 6  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  IV. 

56.  It  would  be  difficult  to  offer  resistance  with 
hands,  feet,  head,  shoulder,  or  breast,  (even  were  one 
to  try)  during  as  many  complete  ^ons  as  there  are 
grains  of  sand  in  the  Ganges. 

57.  One  may  charitably  give  food,  soft  and  solid, 
clothing,  drink,  a  place  for  sleeping  and  sitting,  with 
clean  coverlets  ;  one  may  build  monasteries  of 
sandal-wood,  and  after  furnishing  them  with  double 
pieces  of  fine  white  muslin^  present  them  ; 

58.  One  may  be  assiduous  in  giving  medicines 
of  various  kinds  to  the  sick,  in  honour  of  the  Sugata; 
one  may  spend  alms  during  as  many  y^ons  as  there 
are  grains  of  sand  in  the  Ganges — even  then  one  will 
not  be  able  to  offer  resistance  ^. 

59.  Of  sublime  nature,  unequalled  power,  miracu- 
lous might,  firm  in  the  strength  of  patience  is  the 
Buddha  ;  a  great  ruler  is  the  6^ina,  free  from  imper- 
fections. The  ignorant  cannot  bear  (or  understand) 
such  things  as  these  ^ 

60.  Always  returning,  he  preaches  the  law  to 
those  whose  course  (of  life)  is  conditioned*,  he,  the 
Lord  of  the  law,  the  Lord  of  all  the  world,  the  great 
Lord  ^,  the  Chief  among  the  leaders  of  the  world. 

The  Buddha  is  here  clearly  Dharmara^a,  Yama,  the  chief  of  Arhats, 
or  Manes,  the  personification  of  death. 

'  Dushyayugehi. 

^  Even  virtuous  actions  cannot  avert  death,  the  tamer  of  men, 
the  master  of  gods  and  men. 

^  Sahanti  bala  na  im' idr/'jani. 

*  Nimitta/^ariwa.  The  corresponding  Sanskrit  form  would 
be  nimitta/^ariwam.  I  am  not  sure  of  the  meaning  of  this  term. 
Burnouf  has  '  ceux  qui  portent  des  signes  favorables,'  which  points 
to  a  reading  nimittadhdri^a. 

•'  Ijvaru  sarvaloke,  INIahe^varo;  he,  the  Dharmara^^a,  Yama, 
&c.,  is  also  the  same  with  Ijvara  and  Mahejvara,  well-known  epi- 
thets of  ^iva,  the  destroyer,  time,  death. 


IV.  DISPOSITION.  I  I  7 

6 1.  Fully  aware  of  the  circumstances  (or  places) 
of  (all)  beings  he  indicates  their  duties,  so  multi- 
farious, and  considering  the  variety  of  their  dispo- 
sitions he  inculcates  the  law  with  thousands  of 
arguments. 

62.  He,  the  Tathagata,  who  is  fully  aware  of  the 
course  of  all  beings  and  individuals,  preaches  a 
multifarious  law,  while  pointing  to  this  superior 
enlightenment. 


I  1 8  SADDHARMA-PUATDARIKA.  V. 


CHAPTER  V. 

ON    PLANTS. 

Thereupon  the  Lord  addressed  the  venerable 
Maha-Kai-yapa  and  the  other  senior  great  disciples, 
and  said  :  Very  well,  very  well,  Ka^yapa ;  you  have 
done  very  well  to  proclaim  the  real  qualities  of  the 
Tathagata.  They  are  the  real  qualities  of  the 
Tathagata,  Ka^yapa,  but  he  has  many  more,  innu- 
merable, incalculable,  the  end  of  which  it  would  be 
difficult  to  reach,  even  were  one  to  continue  enume- 
rating them  for  immeasurable  yEons.  The  Tatha- 
gata, Ka^yapa,  is  the  master  of  the  law,  the  king, 
lord,  and  master  of  all  laws.  And  whatever  law  for 
any  case  has  been  instituted  by  the  Tathagata, 
remains  unchanged.  All  laws,  Ka^yapa,  have  been 
aptly  instituted  by  the  Tathagata.  In  his  Tatha- 
gata-wisdom  he  has  instituted  them  in  such  a 
manner  that  all  those  laws  finally  lead  to  the  stage 
of  those  who  know  all\  The  Tathagata  also  dis- 
tinctly knows  the  meaning  of  all  laws.  The  Tatha- 
gata, the  Arhat,  &c.  is  possessed  of  the  faculty  of 
penetrating  all  laws,  possessed  of  the  highest  per- 
fection of  knowledge,  so  that  he  is  able  to  decide 
all  laws,  able  to  display  the  knowledge  of  the  all- 
knowing,  impart  the  knowledge  of  the  all-knowing. 


^  *  All-knowing'  is  one  of  the  most  frequent  euphemistic  phrases 
to  denote  the  state  of  the  dead.  Hence  all-knowing  (sarva^fia) 
and  knowing  nothing  (a^?7a)  virtually  come  to  the  same,  and  the 
commentator  on  Bhagavata-Purawa  X,  78,  6  could  therefore  aptly 
identify  a^?ta  and  sarva^jla. 


V.  ON    PLANTS.  119 

and  lay  down  (the   rules   of)  the  knowledge  of  the 
all-knowing. 

It  is  a  case,  Kai^yapa,  similar  to  that  of  a  great 
cloud  big  with  rain,  coming  up  in  this  wide  universe 
over  all  grasses,  shrubs,  herbs,  trees  of  various 
species  and  kind,  families  of  plants  of  different 
names  growing  on  earth,  on  hills,  or  in  mountain 
caves,  a  cloud  covering  the  wide  universe  to  pour 
down  its  rain  everywhere  and  at  the  same  time. 
Then,  Ka^yyapa,  the  grasses,  shrubs,  herbs,  and  wild 
trees  in  this  universe,  such  as  have  young  and 
tender  stalks,  twigs,  leaves,  and  foliage,  and  such  as 
have  middle-sized  stalks,  twigs,  leaves,  and  foliage, 
and  such  as  have  the  same  fully  developed,  all  those 
grasses,  shrubs,  herbs,  and  wild  trees,  smaller  and 
greater  (other)  trees  will  each,  according  to  its 
faculty  and  power,  suck  the  humid  element  from  the 
water  emitted  by  that  great  cloud,  and  by  that 
water  which,  all  of  one  essence,  has  been  abundantly 
poured  down  by  the  cloud,  they  will  each,  according 
to  its  germ,  acquire  a  regular  development,  growth, 
shooting  up,  and  bigness  ;  and  so  they  will  produce 
blossoms  and  fruits,  and  will  receive,  each  severally, 
their  names.  Rooted  in  one  and  the  same  soil,  all 
those  families  of  plants  and  germs  are  drenched  and 
vivified  by  water  of  one  essence  throughout. 

In  the  same  manner,  Kai"yapa,  does  the  Tatha- 
gata,  the  Arhat,  &c.  appear  in  the  world.  Like 
unto  a  great  cloud  coming  up,  the  Tathagata  ap- 
pears and  sends  forth  his  call  to  the  whole  world, 
including  gods,  men,  and  demons  \     And  even  as  a 

^  Paro-anya  or  Indra,  Jupiter  pluvius,  is  at  the   same  time  the 
thunderer,  Jupiter  tonans. 


120  SADDHARMA-PUiVZ)ARIKA.  V. 

great  cloud,  Ka.cyapa,  extending  over  the  whole  uni- 
verse, in  like  manner,  Ka^yapa,  the  Tathagata,  the 
Arhat,  &c.,  before  the  face  of  the  world,  including 
gods,  men,  and  demons,  lifts  his  voice  and  utters  these 
words  :  I  am  the  Tathagata,  O  ye  gods  and  men!  the 
Arhat,  the  perfectly  enlightened  one;  having  reached 
the  shore  myself,  I  carry  others  to  the  shore ;  being 
free,  I  make  free ;  being  comforted,  I  comfort ; 
being  perfecdy  at  rest,  I  lead  others  to  rest.  By  my 
perfect  wisdom  I  know  both  this  world  and  the  next, 
such  as  they  really  are.  I  am  all-knowing,  all-seeing. 
Come  to  me,  ye  gods  and  men !  hear  the  law.  I  am 
he  who  indicates  the  path  ;  who  shows  the  path,  as 
knowing  the  path,  being  acquainted  with  the  path. 
Then,  Kayyapa,  many  hundred  thousand  myriads  of 
ko/is  of  beings  come  to  hear  the  law  of  the  Tatha- 
gata ;  and  the  Tathagata,  who  knows  the  difference 
as  to  the  faculties  and  the  energy  of  those  beings, 
produces  various  Dharmaparyayas,  tells  many  tales, 
amusing,  agreeable,  both  instructive  and  pleasant, 
tales  by  means  of  which  all  beings  not  only  become 
pleased  with  the  law  in  this  present  life,  but  also 
after  death  will  reach  happy  states,  where  they  are 
to  enjoy  many  pleasures  and  hear  the  law.  By 
listening  to  the  law  they  will  be  freed  from  hin- 
drances and  in  due  course  apply  themselves  to  the 
law  of  the  all-knowing,  according  to  their  faculty, 
power,  and  strength. 

Even  as  the  great  cloud,  Kai'yapa,  after  expanding 
over  the  whole  universe,  pours  out  the  same  water  and 
recreates  by  it  all  grasses,  shrubs,  herbs,  and  trees ; 
even  as  all  these  grasses,  shrubs,  herbs,  and  trees, 
according  to  their  faculty,  power,  and  strength,  suck 
in  the  water  and  thereby  attain  the  full  development 


ON    PLANTS.  12  1 


assigned  to  their  kind;  in  like  manner,  Kai^yapa,  is 
the  law  preached  by  the  Tathagata,  the  Arhat,  &c,,  of 
one  and  the  same  essence,  that  is  to  say,  the  essence 
of  it  is  deliverance,  the  final  aim  being  absence  of 
passion,  annihilation,  knowledge  of  the  all-knowing  \ 
As  to  that,  Ka5"yapa,  {it  must  be  understood)  that 
the  beings  who  hear  the  law  when  it  is  preached 
by  the  Tathagata,  who  keep  it  in  their  memory 
and  apply  themselves  to  it,  do  not  know,  nor 
perceive,  nor  understand  their  ow^n  self.  For, 
Kai-yapa,  the  Tathagata  only  really  knows  who, 
how,  and  of  what  kind  those  beings  are  ;  what^  how, 
and  whereby  they  are  meditating;  what,  how,  and 
whereby  they  are  contemplating ;  what,  why,  and 
whereby  they  are  attaining.  No  one  but  the  Tatha- 
gata, Kai'yapa,  is  there  present,  seeing  all  intuitively, 
and  seeing  the  state  of  those  beings  in  different 
stages,  as  of  the  lowest,  highest,  and  mean  grasses, 
shrubs,  herbs,  and  trees.  I  am  he,  Kai-yapa,  who, 
knowing  the  law  which  is  of  but  one  essence,  viz. 
the  essence  of  deliverance,  (the  law)  ever  peaceful, 
ending  in  Nirva;m,  (the  law)  of  eternal  rest,  having 
but  one  stage  and  placed  in  voidness,  (who  knowing 
this)  do  not  on  a  sudden  reveal  to  all  the  knowledge 
of  the  all-knowing,  since  I  pay  regard  to  the  disposi- 
tions of  all  beings. 

You  are  astonished,  Kai'yapa,  that  you  cannot 
fathom  the  mystery^  expounded  by  the  Tathagata. 
It  is,  Ka-fyapa,  because  the  mystery  expounded  by 


^  The  dead  man  knows  all,  i.e.  has  experienced  all  he  was  to 
experience  in  his  span  of  life. 

2  The  MSS.  here  and  in  the  sequel  have  y^nka.  instead  of  ya^^a, 
a  trace  of  the  original  Prakrit  text. 

^  Sandhabhashita. 


122  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARtKA.  V. 

the   Tathagatas,  the  Arhats,  &c.  is  difficult  to   be 
understood. 

And  on  that  occasion,  the  more  fully  to  explain 
the  same  subject,  the  Lord  uttered  the  following 
stanzas : 

1.  I  am  the  Dharmara^a,  born  in  the  world  as 
the  destroyer  of  existence  ^  I  declare  the  law  to 
all  beings  after  discriminating  their  dispositions. 

2.  Superior  men  of  wise  understanding  ^  guard 
the  word,  guard  the  mystery,  and  do  not  reveal  it  to 
livinor  being-s, 

3.  That  science  is  difficult  to  be  understood ;  the 
simple,  if  hearing  it  on  a  sudden,  would  be  per- 
plexed ;  they  would  in  their  ignorance  fall  out  of 
the  way  and  go  astray. 

4.  I  speak  according  to  their  reach  and  faculty ; 
by  means  of  various  meanings  ^  I  accommodate  my 
view  (or  the  theory). 

5.  It  is,  Kai-yapa*,  as  if  a  cloud  rising  above  the 

^  It  is  known  from  the  Ka//za  Upanishad  that  the  Dharmara^a, 
Death,  knows  all  about  death  and  the  next  world,  and  is  questioned 
about  it  by  Na/'iketas. 

^  Dhirabuddhi. 

'  Or,  permutable  meanings,  anyamanyehi  arthehi. 

*  The  translation  is  uncertain,  because  the  MSS.  most  distinctly 
read  Kajyapo,  which  may  be  a  clerical  error  for  Kajyapa,  a 
common  form  of  the  vocative  in  Prakrit.  As,  however,  Ka^yapo  is 
a  personification  of  gloom,  the  gray  of  twilight,  the  construction  of 
kajyapo  megh^/i,  as  a  gloomy  or  dark  or  gray  cloud,  is  perfectly 
intelligible.  As  toKa^yapain  the  vocative,  this  also  maybe  explained, 
because  he  is  near  the  setting  sun,  the  Dharmara^a  delivering  his 
speech  on  immortality  at  the  third  juncture.  There  he,  Maha- 
Kajyapa  (wrongly  written  Ka^yapa),  immediately  succeeds  the 
Buddha  after  the  Nirvawa  as  the  president  of  the  first  council  of 
monks.  I  need  not  add  that  the  prevailing  opinion  amongst 
scholars  is  different ;  they  see  real  history  in  the  tradition  about 
the  first  council. 


ON    PLANTS.  123 


horizon  shrouds  all  space  (in  darkness)  and  covers 
the  earth. 

6.  That  great  rain -cloud,  big  with  water,  is 
wreathed  with  flashes  of  lightning  and  rouses  with 
its  thundering  call  all  creatures. 

7.  By  warding  off  the  sunbeams,  it  cools  the 
region ;  and  gradually  lowering  so  as  to  come  in 
reach  of  hands,  it  begins  pouring  down  its  water 
all  around. 

8.  And  so,  flashing  on  every  side,  it  pours  out  an 
abundant  mass  of  water  equally,  and  refreshes  this 
earth. 

9.  And  all  herbs  which  have  sprung  up  on  the 
face  of  the  earth,  all  grasses,  shrubs,  forest  trees, 
other  trees  small  and  great ; 

10.  The  various  field  fruits  and  whatever  is 
green ;  all  plants  on  hills,  in  caves  and  thickets ; 

11.  All  those  grasses,  shrubs,  and  trees  are  vivi- 
fied by  the  cloud  that  both  refreshes  the  thirsty 
earth  and  waters  the  herbs. 

12.  Grasses  and  shrubs  absorb  the  water  of  one 
essence  which  issues  from  the  cloud  according  to 
their  faculty  and  reach. 

13.  And  all  trees,  great,  small,  and  mean,  drink 
that  water  according  to  their  growth  and  faculty, 
and  grow  lustily. 

14.  The  great  plants  whose  trunk,  stalk,  bark, 
twigs,  pith,  and  leaves  are  moistened  by  the  water 
from  the  cloud  develop  their  blossoms  and  fruits. 

15.  They  yield  their  products,  each  according  to 
its  own  faculty,  reach,  and  the  particular  nature  of 
the  germ  ;  still  the  water  emitted  (from  the  cloud)  is 
of  but  one  essence. 

16.  In    the    same   way,    Ka^yapa,    the     Buddha 


A 


1 24  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  V. 

comes  into  the  world  like  a  rain-cloud  \  and,  once 
born,  he,  the  world's  Lord,  speaks  and  shows  the 
real  course  of  life. 

17.  And  the  great  Seer,  honoured  in  the  world, 
including  the  gods,  speaks  thus  :  I  am  the  Tatha- 
gata,  the  highest  of  men,  the  6^ina;  I  have  appeared 
in  this  world  like  a  cloud. 

18.  I  shall  refresh  all  beings  whose  bodies  are 
withered,  who  are  clogged  to  the  triple  world.  I 
shall  bring  to  felicity  those  that  are  pining  away 
with  toils,  give  them  pleasures  and  (final)  rest. 

19.  Hearken  to  me,  ye  hosts  of  gods  and  men; 
approach  to  behold  me :  I  am  the  Tathagata,  the 
Lord,  who  has  no  superior,  who  appears  in  this 
world  to  save  ^. 

20.  To  thousands  of  ko/is  of  living  beings  I 
preach  a  pure  and  most  bright  law  that  has  but  one 
scope,  to  wit,  deliverance  and  rest. 

21.  I  preach  with  ever  the  same  voice,  constantly 
taking  enlightenment  as  my  text.  For  this  is  equal 
for  all;  no  partiality  is  in  it,  neither  hatred  nor 
affection. 

22.  I  am  inexorable",  bear  no  love  nor  hatred 
towards  any  one,  and  proclaim  the  law  to  all  crea- 
tures without  distinction,  to  the  one  as  well  as  the 
other. 


^  In  the  legend,  it  is  well  known,  he  enters  the  womb  of  the 
Great  Mother,  Maha-lVIaya  (identical  with  Prakrni,  Aditi,  both 
Nature  and  Earth),  as  an  elephant.  The  discrepancy  between  the 
two  legends  is  more  apparent  than  real,  for  in  Indian  poetry  the 
clouds  are  called  elephants. 

^  Like  Apollo  aatTxjp. 

^  Anuniyata  mahya  na  ka/tid  asti.  I  suppose  that  anuniya 
answers  to  Sanskrit  anuneya. 


ON    PLANTS.  125 


23.  Whether  walking,  standing,  or  sitting,  I  am 
exchislvely  occupied  with  this  task  of  proclaiming 
the  law.  I  never  get  tired  of  sitting  on  the  chair 
I  have  ascended. 

24.  I  recreate  the  whole  world  like  a  cloud  shed- 
ding its  water  without  distinction  ;  I  have  the  same 
feelings  for  respectable  people  as  for  the  low ;  for 
moral  persons  as  for  the  immoral ; 

25.  For  the  depraved  as  for  those  who  observe 
the  rules  of  good  conduct ;  for  those  who  hold 
sectarian  views  and  unsound  tenets  as  for  those 
whose  views  are  sound  and  correct. 

26.  I  preach  the  law  to  the  inferior  (in  mental 
culture)  as  well  as  to  persons  of  superior  under- 
standing and  extraordinary  faculties  ;  inaccessible  to 
weariness,  I  spread  in  season  the  rain  of  the  law. 

27.  After  hearing  me,  each  according  to  his 
faculty,  the  several  beings  find  their  determined 
place  in  various  situations,  amongst  gods,  men, 
beautiful  beings  \  amongst  Indras,  Brahmas,  or  the 
monarchs,  rulers  of  the  universe, 

28.  Hear,  now,  I  am  going  to  explain  what  is 
meant  by  those  plants  of  different  size,  some  of 
them  being  low  in  the  world,  others  middle-sized 
and  Qrreat. 

29.  Small  plants  are  called  the  men  who  walk  in 
the  knowledge  of  the  law,  which  is  free  from  evil 
after  the  attaining  of  Nirva;/a,  who  possess  the  six 
transcendent  faculties  and  the  triple  science. 

^  Manorameshu,  perhaps  women  are  meant.  A  var.  lect.  has 
manoratheshu,  i.e.  amongst  fancies,  fanciful  beings,  chimeras. 
This  reading  would  rather  lead  us  to  see  in  those  beautiful  or 
charming  beings  some  kind  of  geniuses,  cherubim,  alias  Vidya- 
dharas. 


126  SADDHARMA-PUA^Z)ARIKA.  V. 


30.  Mean  plants  are  called  the  men  who,  dwelling 
in  mountain  caverns,  covet  the  state  of  a  Pra- 
tyekabuddha,  and  whose  intelligence  is  moderately 
purified. 

31.  Those  who  aspire  to  become  leading  men 
(thinking),  I  will  become  a  Buddha,  a  chief  of  gods 
and  men,  and  who  practise  exertion  and  meditation, 
are  called  the  highest  plants. 

32.  But  the  sons  of  Sugata,  who  sedulously  prac- 
tise benevolence  and  a  peaceful  conduct,  who  have 
arrived  at  certainty  about  their  being  leading  men, 
these  are  called  trees. 

33.  Those  who  move  forward  the  wheel  that 
never  rolls  back,  and  with  manly  strength  stand  firm 
in  the  exercise  of  miraculous  power,  releasing  many 
ko/is  of  beings,  those  are  called  great  trees  \ 

34.  Yet  it  is  one  and  the  same  law  which  is 
preached  by  the  6'ina,  like  the  water  emitted  by  the 
cloud  is  one  and  the  same ;  different  only  are  the 
faculties  as  described,  just  as  the  plants  on  the  face 
of  the  earth. 

35.  By  this  parable  thou  mayst  understand  the 
skilfulness  of  the  Tathagata,  how  he  preaches  one 
law,  the  various  developments  whereof  may  be 
likened  to  drops  of  rain. 

36.  I    also    pour  out  rain:    the    rain   of  the  law 

^  It  is  not  easy  to  make  out  what  kind  of  terrestrial  beings  are 
severally  alluded  to  in  stanzas  29-33.  I  first  thought  that  the  small 
plants  were  simply  the  Brahma/^arins,  the  mean  ones  the  Vana- 
prasthas  or  hermits,  and  the  highest  plants  the  Yatis  ;  but  it  seems 
more  reasonable  to  suppose  that  real  sons  of  Buddha  are  meant  ; 
cf.  the  stanzas  39-41.  The  Buddhists  alluded  to  in  stanza  32  are 
simple  monks,  whereas  those  of  the  following  stanza  are  preachers, 
able  exponents  of  the  law,  and  clever  propagandists  of  the  Bauddha 
religion. 


V.  ON    PLANTS.  127 

by  which  this  whole  world  is  refreshed ;  and  each 
according  to  his  faculty  takes  to  heart  this  well- 
spoken  law^  that  is  one  in  its  essence. 

37.  Even  as  all  grasses  and  shrubs,  as  well  as 
plants  of  middle  size,  trees  and  great  trees  at  the 
time  of  rain  look  bright  in  all  quarters  ; 

2)S.  So  it  is  the  very  nature  of  the  law  to  promote 
the  everlasting  weal  of  the  world  ;  by  the  law  the 
whole  world  is  recreated,  and  as  the  plants  (when 
refreshed)  expand  their  blossoms,  the  world  does 
the  same  when  refreshed. 

39.  The  plants  that  in  their  growth  remain 
middle-sized,  are  Arhats  (saints)  stopping  when 
they  have  overcome  frailties,  (and)  the  Pratyeka- 
buddhas  who,  living  in  woody  thickets^,  accomplish 
this  well-spoken  law. 

40.  (But)  the  many  Bodhisattvas  who,  thoughtful 
and  wise,  go  their  way  all  over  the  triple  world, 
striving  after  supreme  enlightenment,  they  continue 
increasing  in  growth  like  trees. 

41.  Those  who,  endowed  with  magical  powers 
and  being  adepts  in  the  four  degrees  of  medita- 
tion, feel  delight  at  hearing  of  complete  voidness^ 
and  emit  thousands  of  rays,  they  are  called  the 
great  trees  on  earth. 

42.  So  then,  Ka^yapa,  is  the  preaching  of  the  law, 
like  the  water  poured  out  by  the  cloud  everywhere 
alike;  by  which  plants  and  men(?)  thrive,  endless 
(and  eternal)  blossoms  (are  produced)*. 


^  The  term  used  might  be  rendered  by  '  gospel.' 
^  Pratyekabuddha  vanasha/zfi^a/^ariwo,  &c.     Burnouf  must 
have  had  quite  a  different  reading. 
^  Or  unreality,  junyata. 
*  Yehi  (the   Sanskrit  would  require  the  dual)  vivarddhanti 


128  SADDHARMA-PUA'DARiKA.  V. 

43.  I  reveal  the  law  which  has  its  cause  in  itself; 
at  due  time  I  show  Buddha-enlightenment ;  this  is 
my  supreme  skilfulness  and  that  of  all  leaders  of 
the  world. 

44.  What  I  here  say  is  true  in  the  highest  sense 
of  the  word;  all  my  disciples  attain  Nirva/^a ;  by 
following  the  sublime  path  of  enlightenment  all  my 
disciples  shall  become  Buddhas. 

And  further,  Kai'yapa,  the  Tathagata,  in  his  edu- 
cating ^  creatures,  is  equal  (i.  e.  impartial)  and  not 
unequal  (i.  e.  partial).  As  the  light  of  the  sun  and 
moon,  Kai"yapa,  shines  upon  all  the  world,  upon  the 
virtuous  and  the  wicked,  upon  high  and  low,  upon 
the  fragrant  and  the  ill-smelling  ;  as  their  beams 
are  sent  down  upon  everything  equally,  without 
inequality  (partiality) ;  so,  too,  Kai^yapa,  the  intel- 
lectual light  of  the  knowledge  of  the  omniscient,  the 
Tathagatas,  the  Arhats,  &c.,  the  preaching  of  the 
true  law  proceeds  equally  in  respect  to  all  beings 
in  the  five  states  of  existence,  to  all  who  according  to 
their  particular  disposition  are  devoted  to  the  great 
vehicle,  or  to  the  vehicle  of  the  Pratyekabuddhas,  or 
to  the  vehicle  of  the  disciples.  Nor  is  there  any  defi- 
ciency or  excess  in  the  brightness  of  the  Tathagata- 
knowledge  ^  up  to  one's  becoming  fully  acquainted 
with  the  law.  There  are  not  three  vehicles,  Ka^yapa; 
there  are  but  beings  who  act  differently ;  therefore 
it  is  declared  that  there  are  three  vehicles. 

When  the  Lord  had  thus  spoken,  the  venerable 

(Sansk.  °nte)  mahoshadhiyo  manushya(Sansk,  manushya^?) 
pushpa«i  anantakani. 

*  And  removing. 

^  Tathagata^jlanaprabhaya^  ;    var.  lect.   Tathagatapra- 

*^   A  At 

^»iaya>7. 


V.  ON    PLANTS.  129 

Maha-Kai-yapa  said  to  him  :  Lord,  if  there  are  not 
three  vehicles,  for  what  reason  then  is  the  designa- 
tion of  disciples  (6'ravakas),  Buddhas,  and  Bodhisat- 
tvas  kept  up  in  the  present  times  ? 

On  this  speech  the  Lord  answered  the  venerable 
Maha-Kai^yapa  as  follows  :  It  is,  Kai"yapa,  as  if 
a  potter  made  different  vessels  out  of  the  same 
clay.  Some  of  those  pots  are  to  contain  sugar, 
others  ghee,  others  curds  and  milk ;  others,  of  in- 
ferior quality,  are  vessels  of  impurity.  There  is  no 
diversity  in  the  clay  used ;  no,  the  diversity  of  the 
pots  is  only  due  to  the  substances  which  are  put 
into  each  of  them.  In  like  manner,  Ka-yyapa,  is  there 
but  one  vehicle,  viz.  the  Buddha-vehicle  ;  there  is  no 
second  vehicle,  no  third. 

The  Lord  having  thus  spoken,  the  venerable 
Maha-Kai-yapa  said  :  Lord,  if  the  beings  are  of 
different  disposition,  will  there  be  for  those  who 
have  left  the  triple  world  one  Nirva;^a,  or  two,  or 
three?  The  Lord  replied:  Nirva/^a,  Kai^yapa,  is  a 
consequence  of  understanding  that  all  laws  (things) 
are  equal.  Hence  there  is  but  one  Nirva;za,  not  two, 
not  three^  Therefore,  Ka^yapa,  I  will  tell  thee  a 
parable,  for  men  of  good  understanding  will  generally 
readily  enough  catch  the  meaning  of  what  is  taught 
under  the  shape  of  a  parable. 

It  is  a  case,  Kai'yapa,  similar  to  that  of  a  certain 
blind-born  man,  who  says  :  There  are  no  handsome 
or  ugly  shapes ;  there  are  no  men  able  to  see  hand- 
some or  ugly  shapes;  there  exists  no  sun  nor  moon  ; 
there  are   no  asterisms  nor  planets ;    there  are  no 


^  Cf.  Ecclesiastes  ix.  2  :  '  All  things  come  alike  to  all :  there 
is  one  event  to  the  righteous,  and  to  the  wicked  ;  to  the  good  and 
to  the  clean,  and  to  the  unclean.' 
[21]  K 


130  SADDHARMA-PUiVZJARlKA.  V. 

men  able  to  see  planets.  But  other  persons  say 
to  the  blind-born  :  There  are  handsome  and  ugly 
shapes;  there  are  men  able  to  see  handsome  and 
ugly  shapes;  there  is  a  sun  and  moon;  there 
are  asterisms  and  planets;  there  are  men  able  to 
see  planets.  But  the  blind-born  does  not  believe 
them,  nor  accept  what  they  say.  Now  there  is  a 
physician  who  knows  all  diseases.  He  sees  that 
blind-born  man  and  makes  to  himself  this  reflection : 
The  disease  of  this  man  originates  in  his  sinful 
actions  in  former  times.  All  diseases  possible  to 
arise  are  fourfold  :  rheumatical,  cholerical,  phlegma- 
tical,  and  caused  by  a  complication  of  the  (corrupted) 
humours.  The  physician,  after  thinking  again  and 
again  on  a  means  to  cure  the  disease,  makes  to  him- 
self this  reflection:  Surely,  with  the  drugs  in  common 
use  it  is  impossible  to  cure  this  disease,  but  there 
are  in  the  Himalaya,  the  king  of  mountains,  four 
herbs,  to  wit :  first,  one  called  Possessed-of-all-sorts- 
of-colours-and-flavours ;  second,  Delivering-from-all- 
diseases  ;  third,  Delivering-from-all-poisons  ;  fourth, 
Procuring-happiness-to-those-standing-in-the- right- 
place.  As  the  physician  feels  compassion  for  the 
blind-born  man  he  contrives  some  device  to  get  to 
the  Himalaya,  the  king  of  mountains.  There  he 
goes  up  and  down  and  across  to  search.  In  doing 
so  he  finds  the  four  herbs.  One  he  eives  after 
chewing  it  with  the  teeth  ;  another  after  pounding ; 
another  after  having  it  mixed  with  another  drug  and 
boiled ;  another  after  having  it  mixed  with  a  raw 
drug  ;  another  after  piercing  with  a  lancet  some- 
where a  vein^ ;    another   after   singeing  it   in    fire; 

^  Sarirasthanara  viddhva,  var.  lect.  sarasthanaw  v.,  with  a 
marginal  correction  sarirasthanaw  v.  I  consider  the  original 
reading  to  have  been  sir  as  than  a;//. 


V.  ON    PLANTS.  131 

another  after  combining  it  with  various  other  sub- 
stances so  as  to  enter  in  a  compound  potion,  food, 
&c.  Owing  to  these  means  being  applied  the  bHnd- 
born  recovers  his  eyesight,  and  in  consequence  of 
that  recovery  he  sees  outwardly  and  inwardly  \  far 
and  near,  the  shine  of  sun  and  moon,  the  asterisms, 
planets,  and  all  phenomena.  Then  he  says :  O  how 
foolish  was  I  that  I  did  not  believe  what  they  told 
me,  nor  accepted  what  they  affirmed.  Now  I  see 
all ;  I  am  delivered  from  my  blindness  and  have 
recovered  my  eyesight ;  there  is  none  in  the  world 
who  could  surpass  me.  And  at  the  same  moment 
Seers  of  the  five  transcendent  faculties  2,  strong  in  the 
divine  sig-ht  and  hearinof,  in  the  knowledo-e  of  others' 
minds,  in  the  memory  of  former  abodes,  in  magical 
science  and  intuition,  speak  to  the  man  thus  :  Good 
man,  thou  hast  just  recovered  thine  eyesight,  nothing 
more,  and  dost  not  know  yet  anything.  Whence 
comes  this  conceitedness  to  thee  ?  Thou  hast  no 
wisdom,  nor  art  thou  a  clever  man.  Further  they 
say  to  him :  Good  man,  when  sitting  in  the  interior 
of  thy  room,  thou  canst  not  see  nor  distinguish  forms 


*  Bahir  adhyatmam,  (the  things)  external  and  in  relation  to 
one's  own  self. 

^  I.  e.  simply  the  five  senses.  The  term  Abhi^fia  can  hardly 
originally  have  meant  '  transcendent  faculty  or  knowledge,'  because 
it  is  a  derivation  from  a  compound  abhi^anati.  Neither  in 
Sanskrit  nor  in  Prakrit  can  abhi^wa  denote  anything  else  but 
perception,  acknowledgment,  recognition.  Yet  it  cannot  be  denied 
that  those  who  used  it  intended  by  it  to  convey  the  meaning  of 
something  grand  and  imposing,  especially  the  senses  of  a  spiritual 
man,  as  distinguished  from  the  profanum  vulgus.  As  to  the 
Seers,  7?/shis,  here  mentioned,  I  think  that  they  are  the  senses  per- 
sonified, otherwise  called  devas,  gods.  Deva,  to  denote  an  organ 
of  sense,  occurs  frequently,  e.  g.  Mu/za'aka  Upanishad  III,  i ,  8. 

K  2 


132  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARiKA.  V. 

outside,  nor  discern  which  beings  are  animated  with 
kind  feehngs  and  which  with  hostile  feehngs ;  thou 
canst  not  distinguish  nor  hear  at  the  distance  of  five 
yo^'anas  the  voice  of  a  man  or  the  sound  of  a  drum, 
conch  trumpet,  and  the  Hke ;  thou  canst  not  even 
walk  as  far  as  a  kos  without  lifting  up  thy  feet ; 
thou  hast  been  produced  and  developed  in  thy 
mother's  womb  without  remembering  the  fact ;  how 
then  wouldst  thou  be  clever,  and  how  canst  thou 
say  :  I  see  all  ?  Good  man,  thou  takest^  darkness 
for  light,  and  takest  light  for  darkness. 

Whereupon  the  Seers  are  asked  by  the  man  :  By 
what  means  and  by  what  good  work  shall  I  acquire 
such  wisdom  and  with  your  favour  acquire  those 
good  qualities  (or  virtues)  ?  And  the  Seers  say  to 
that  man  :  If  that  be  thy  wish,  go  and  live  in  the 
wilderness  or  take  thine  abode  in  mountain  caves,  to 
meditate  on  the  law  and  cast  off  evil  passions.  So 
shalt  thou  become  endowed  with  the  virtues  of  an 
ascetic^  and  acquire  the  transcendent  faculties.  The 
man  catches  their  meaninsf  and  becomes  an  ascetic. 
Living  in  the  wilderness,  the  mind  intent  upon  one 
sole  object,  he  shakes  off  worldly  desires,  and  acquires 
the  five  transcendent  faculties.  After  that  acqui- 
sition he  reflects  thus  :  Formerly  I  did  not  do  the 
right  thing;  hence  no  good  accrued  to  me  ^      Now, 

^  Szmg3.n3.si,  var.  lect.  saw^anishe. 

^  Dhutaguwa,  Pali  the  same,  besides  dhutaguwa.  In  Pali 
the  dhiitangas  or  dhu°  denote  thirteen  ascetic  practices;  see 
Childers,  Pali  Diet.  s.  v.  The  Dhutaguwas  are,  according  to  the 
same  author's  statement,  other  names  for  the  Dhutahgas,  but  I 
venture  to  think  that  they  are  the  twenty-eight  virtues  of  a  Dhu- 
tahga,  as  enumerated  in  Milinda  Paftho  (ed.  Trenckner),  p.  351. 

^  Purvam  anyat  karma  krz'tavan,  tena  me  na  kaj/i'id  gu7/o 
'dhigata//. 


ON    PLANTS.  133 


however,  I  can  go  whither  my  mind  prompts  me ; 
•formerly  I  was  ignorant,  of  Httle  understanding,  in 
fact,  a  blind  man. 

Such,  Kai'yapa,  is  the  parable  I  have  invented  to 
make  thee  understand  my  meaning.  The  moral  to 
be  drawn  from  it  is  as  follows.  The  word  '  blind- 
born,'  Ka5"yapa,  is  a  designation  for  the  creatures 
staying  in  the  whirl  of  the  world  with  its  six  states ; 
the  creatures  who  do  not  know  the  true  law  and 
are  heaping  up  the  thick  darkness  of  evil  passions. 
Those  are  blind  from  ignorance  ^  and  in  consequence 
of  it  they  build  up  conceptions^;  in  consequence  of 
the  latter  name-and-form,  and  so  forth,  up  to  the 
genesis  of  this  whole  huge  mass  of  evils^ 

So  the  creatures  blind  from  ignorance  remain  in 
the  whirl  of  life,  but  the  Tathagata,  who  is  out  of 
the  triple  world,  feels  compassion,  prompted  by 
which,  like  a  father  for  his  dear  and  only  son,  he 
appears  in  the  triple  world  and  sees  with  his  eye  of 
wisdom  that  the  creatures  are  revolving  in  the  circle 
of  the  mundane  whirl,  and  are  toiling  without  finding 
the  right  means  to  escape  from  the  rotation.     And 

^  Or,  false  knowledge,  avidya,  which  in  the  Chain  of  Causation 
(pratityasamutpada,  Pali  pati/^X-asamutpada)  occupies  exactly 
the  same  place  as  in  other  systems  of  Indian  philosophy.  In 
reality  the  avidya  was  not  only  the  origin  of  all  evils,  but  also  the 
remedy,  the  panacea.  It  was,  however,  thought  convenient  to  veil 
that  conclusion  and  to  call  the  future  state  of  complete  ignorance 
'  all-knowingness.' 

'^  Rather,  products  (sawskara)  of  the  imaginative  power,  of 
fancy.  These  form  the  second  item  in  the  enumeration  of  Causes 
and  Effects. 

^  The  genesis  of  diseases,  death,  &c.  The  merely  ideal  nature 
of  this  genesis  is  proved  by  the  fact  that  the  sage  who  has  overcome 
avidya  is  just  as  liable  to  diseases  and  death  as  the  most  ignorant 
creature. 


1 34  SADDHARMA-PUiVBARlKA.  V. 

on.  seeing  this  he  comes  to  the  conckision :  Yon 
beings,  according  to  the  good  works  they  have  done 
in  former  states,  have  feeble  aversions  and  strong 
attachments;  (or)  feeble  attachments  and  strong 
aversions ;  some  have  little  wisdom,  others  are 
clever;  some  have  soundly  developed  views,  others 
have  unsound  views.  To  all  of  them  the  Tathagata 
skilfully  shows  three  vehicles  \ 

The  Seers  in  the  parable,  those  possessing  the  five 
transcendent  faculties  and  clear-sight,  are  the  Bodhi- 
sattvas^  who  produce  enlightened  thought,  and  by 
the  acquirement  of  acquiescence  in  the  eternal  law  ^ 
awake  us  to  supreme,  perfect  enlightenment. 

The  great  physician  in  the  parable  is  the  Tatha- 
gata. To  the  blind-born  may  be  likened  the  creatures 


^  With  this  we  may  compare  the  term  trivartman  (of  three 
paths),  applied  to  the  individual  or  living  being,  5'vetaj'vatara  Upa- 
nishad  V,  7.  ^S'ahkara  explains  it  by  devayanadi;  in  the  more 
ancient  and  natural  meaning,  the  word  may  have  been  applied  to 
the  three  divisions  of  time.  Cf.  the  same  Upanishad  I,  4,  where 
the  brahma/^akra,  the  brahma- wheel,  is  said  to  be  trivrz't, 
threefold. 

^  In  the  Yoga  called  buddhisattva,  the  reasoning  faculty. 
The  Bodhisattvas  are  the  five  Dhyani-Bodhisattvas  Samantabhadra, 
&c.,  who  do  no  more  differ  from  the  five  Dhyani-Buddhas  Vai- 
rokana,  &c.,  than  the  balas  do  from  the  indriyas.  Cf  Burnouf, 
Introd.  p.  118. 

^  Anutpattikadharmakshantim  pratilabhya,var.lect.anut- 
pattiki;«  kshantim  p.  Anutpattika,  being  a  Bahuvrihi,  neces- 
sarily means  'having  no  origin,  no  beginning,'  alias  anadi.  The 
eternal  law  is  that  of  rise  and  decay,  and  in  so  far  the  purport  of 
the  phrase  seems  not  materially  to  differ  from  the  translation  in 
Goldstiicker's  Diet., '  enduring  conditions  which  have  not  yet  taken 
place.'  The  word  '  acquiescence '  in  my  version  gives  but  one  side 
of  the  meaning,  for  it  also  denotes  *  undergoing.'  In  reality  the 
sanctimonious  phrase  comes  to  this :  every  thinking  being  suffers 
the  eternal  law,  i.  e.  he  must  die. 


ON    PLANTS.  135 


blind  with  infatuation.  Attachment,  aversion,  and 
infatuation  are  Hkened  to  rheum,  bile,  and  phlegm. 
The  sixty-two  false  theories  also  must  be  looked 
upon  as  such  (i.e.  as  doshas,  'humours  and  cor- 
rupted humours  of  the  body,'  'faults  and  corrup- 
tions'). The  four  herbs  are  like  vanity  (or  voidness), 
causelessness  (or  purposelessness),  unfixedness,  and 
reaching  Nirva^^a.  Just  as  by  using  different  drugs 
different  diseases  are  healed,  so  by  developing  the 
idea  of  vanity  (or  voidness),  purposelessness,  unfixed- 
ness, (which  are)  the  principles  of  emancipation,  is 
ignorance  suppressed  ;  the  suppression  of  ignorance 
is  succeeded  by  the  suppression  of  conceptions  (or 
fancies) ;  and  so  forth,  up  to  the  suppression  of  the 
whole  huge  mass  of  evils.  And  thus  one's  mind  will 
dwell  no  more  on  good  nor  on  evil. 

To  the  man  who  recovers  his  eyesight  is  likened 
the  votary  of  the  vehicle  of  the  disciples  and  of  Pra- 
tyekabuddhas.  He  rends  the  ties  of  evil  passion  in 
the  whirl  of  the  world ;  freed  from  those  ties  he  is 
released  from  the  triple  world  with  its  six  states  of 
existence.  Therefore  the  votary  of  the  vehicle  of  the 
disciples  may  think  and  speak  thus  :  There  are  no 
more  laws  to  be  penetrated ;  I  have  reached  Nir- 
va/^a.  Then  the  Tathagata  preaches  to  him  :  How 
can  he  who  has  not  penetrated  all  laws  have  reached 
Nirva;2a  ?  The  Lord  rouses  him  to  enlightenment, 
and  the  disciple,  when  the  consciousness  of  en- 
lightenment has  been  awakened  in  him,  no  longer 
stays  in  the  mundane  whirl,  but  at  the  same  time 
has  not  yet  reached  Nirva;^a^     As  he  has  arrived  at 


^  I.  e.  he  is  not  yet  actually  dead,  but  dead  to  the  world ;  he  is 
a  Givan-mukta. 


136  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARlKA.  Y. 


true  Insight,  he  looks  upon  this  triple  world  in  every 
direction  as  void,  resembling  the  produce  of  magic, 
similar  to  a  dream,  a  mirage,  an  echo.  He  sees  that 
all  laws  (and  phenomena)  are  unborn  and  unde- 
stroyed,  not  bound  and  not  loose,  not  dark  and  not 
bright.  He  who  views  the  profound  laws  in  such  a 
light,  sees,  as  if  he  were  not  seeing,  the  whole  triple 
world  full  of  beings  of  contrarv  and  omnifarious 
fancies  and  dispositions. 

And  on  that  occasion,  in  order  to  more  amply 
explain  the  same  subject,  the  Lord  uttered  the  fol- 
lowing stanzas : 

45.  As  the  rays  of  the  sun  and  moon  descend 
alike  on  all  men,  good  and  bad,  without  deficiency 
(in  one  case)  or  surplus  (in  the  other); 

46.  So  the  wisdom  of  the  Tathagata  shines  like 
the  sun  and  moon  \  leading  all  beings  without 
partiality. 

47.  As  the  potter,  making  clay  vessels,  produces 
from  the  same  clay  pots  for  sugar,  milk,  ghee,  or 
water ; 

48.  Some  for  impurities,  others  for  curdled  milk, 
the  clay  used  by  the  artificer  ^  for  the  vessels  being 
of  but  one  sort ; 

49.  As  a  vessel  is  made  to  receive  all  its  dis- 
tinguishing qualities  according  to  the  quality  of  the 
substance  laid  into  it^,  so  the  Tathagatas,  on  account 
of  the  diversity  of  taste, 

^  Tathagatasya  pra^ila  ka,  bhasad'  aditya/^andravat.  B  ha  sad' 
stands  for  bhasadi,  Sansk.  bhasate.  Avar.  lect.  has  Tathagatasya 
pra^fiabha  sama  hy  a.,  i.  e.  '  the  lustre  of  the  Tathagata's  wisdom  is 
equal  (to  all),  like  the  sun  and  moon.' 

^  Bhargava,  to  which  we  may  assign  the  meaning  of  'a  skilful 
workman,  artificer,' because  it  is  one  of  the  synonyms  of  tvash/r/. 

^  Yadr/k  prakshipyate  dravyam  bhao-anaz«  tena  labhyate  (read, 


ON    PLANTS.  137 


50.  Mention  a  diversity  of  vehicles,  though  the 
Buddha-vehicle  be  the  only  indisputable  one.  He 
who  ignores  the  rotation  of  mundane  existence,  has 
no  perception  of  blessed  rest ; 

51.  But  he  who  understands  that  all  laws  are  void 
and  without  reality  (and  without  individual  character) 
penetrates  the  enlightenment  of  the  perfectly  en- 
lightened Lords  in  its  very  essence. 

52.  One  who  occupies  a  middle  position  of  wisdom^ 
is  called  a  Pratyeka^'ina  (i.e.  Pratyekabuddha) ;  one 
lacking  the  insight  of  voidness^  is  termed  a  disciple. 

53.  But  after  understanding  all  laws  one  is  called 
a  perfectly-enlightened  one ;  such  a  one  is  assiduous 
in  preaching  the  law  to  living  beings  by  means  of 
hundreds  of  devices. 

54.  It  is  as  if  some  blind-born  man,  because  he 
sees  no  sun,  moon,  planets,  and  stars,  in  his  blind 
ignorance  (should  say):  There  are  no  visible  things^ 
at  all. 

55.  But  a  great  physician  taking  compassion  on 
the  blind  man,  goes  to  the  Himalaya,  where  (seeking) 
across,  up  and  down, 

56.  He  fetches  from  the  mountain   four  plants  ; 

lambhyate)  sarva(n)  vi^eshe  'pi  (Prakrit  for  vijeshan  api,  though  the 
stanza  bears  the  traces  of  having  originally  been  in  Sanskrit)  tatha 
ru/^ibhedat Tathagata/^.  A var. lect.haskshate  (one  syllable  wanting) 
instead  of  la(m)bhyate;  what  is  intended  is  rakshate,  it  keeps. 

^  Pra^fiamadhyavyavasthanat  Pratyeka^ina  U/^yate. 

®  I  am  at  a  loss  to  explain  how  this  statement  is  to  be  recon- 
ciled with  the  bearings  of  the  passage  in  prose  before,  unless  we 
assume  that  the  philosophers  here  alluded  to  are  followers  of  other 
creeds,  who  believe  in  the  existence  of  a  soul.  Their  views  are  in 
opposition  to  those  of  the  Buddha;  yet  they  are  to  be  spoken  of  with 
moderate  respect,  because  they  do  not  belong  to  the  profanum 
vulgus. 

^  Rather  here,  phenomena. 


138  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  V. 

the  herb  Of-all-colours-flavours-and-cases\  and  others. 
These  he  intends  to  apply. 

57.  He  applies  them  in  this  manner:  one  he 
gives  to  the  blind  man  after  chewing  it,  another 
after  pounding,  again  another  by  introducing  it  with 
the  point  of  a  needle  into  the  man's  body. 

58.  The  man  having  got  his  eyesight,  sees  the 
sun,  moon,  planets,  and  stars,  and  arrives  at  the 
conclusion  that  it  was  from  sheer  ignorance  that  he 
spoke  thus  as  he  had  formerly  done. 

59.  In  the  same  way  do  people  of  great  ignorance, 
blind  from  their  birth,  move  in  the  turmoil  of  the 
world,  because  they  do  not  know  the  wheel  of 
causes  and  effects,  the  path  of  toils  ^. 

60.  In  the  world  so  blinded  by  ignorance  appears 
the  highest  of  those  who  know  all,  the  Tathagata, 
the  great  physician,  of  compassionate  nature. 

61.  As  an  able  teacher  he  shows  the  true  law ;  he 
reveals  supreme  Buddha-enlightenment  to  him  who 
is  most  advanced. 

62.  To  those  of  middline  wisdom  the  Leader 
preaches  a  middling  enlightenment ;  again  another 
enlightenment  he  recommends  to  him  who  is  afraid 
of  the  mundane  whirl. 

63.  The  disciple  who  by  his  discrimination  has 
escaped  from  the  triple  world  thinks  he  has  reached 
pure,  blest  Nirva;^a^  but  it  is  only  by  knowing  all 


^  The  reading  is  doubtful :  sarvavar;/arasasthanan  nagal  labhata 
oshadhiw,  evamadu  /^atasro  'tha,  &c. ;  var.  lect.  °sthananuga;«  1.,  &c. 
This  may  mean,  fit  for  all  colours,  flavours,  and  cases. 

^  Prati(t)yotpada^akrasya — du//khavartmana/^. 

^  In  other  words,  he  has  indeed  attained  a  qualified  (sopadhi- 
^esha,  Pali  upadisesa  or  sa-upadij-esha)  Nirva;;a,  or  as  non- 
Buddhists  say,  ^ivanmukti. 


V.  ON    PLANTS.  139 

laws  (and  the  universal  laws)   that   the  immortal  ^ 
Nirva;^a  is  reached. 

64.  In  that  case  it  is  as  if  the  great  Seers,  moved 
by  compassion,  said  to  him  :  Thou  art  mistaken  ;  do 
not  be  proud  of  thy  knowledge. 

65.  When  thou  art  in  the  interior  of  thy  room, 
thou  canst  not  perceive  what  is  going  on  without, 
fool  as  thou  art. 

66.  Thou  who,  when  staying  within,  dost  not 
perceive  even  now  what  people  outside  are  doing 
or  not  doing,  how  wouldst  thou  be  wise,  fool  as 
thou  art? 

6"].  Thou  art  not  able  to  hear  a  sound  at  a  dis- 
tance of  but  five  yo^anas,  far  less  at  a  greater 
distance. 

68.  Thou  canst  not  discern  who  are  malevolent  or 
benevolent  towards  thee.  Whence  then  comes  that 
pride  to  thee  ? 

69.  If  thou  hast  to  walk  so  far  as  a  kos,  thou 
canst  not  go  without  a  beaten  track  ^;  and  what  hap- 
pened to  thee  when  in  thy  mother's  womb  thou 
hast  immediately  forgotten. 

70.  In  this  world  he  is  called  all-knowing  who 
possesses  the  five  transcendent  faculties,  but  when 
thou  who  knowest  nothing  pretendest  to  be  all- 
knowing,  it  is  an  effect  of  infatuation. 

71.  If  thou  art  desirous  of  omniscience,  direct  thy 
attention  to  transcendent  wisdom  ;  then  betake  thy- 

^  I.  e.  eternal,  because  in  this  system  the  dead  is  dead  for  ever. 
This  immortal,  everlasting  Nirvawa  is,  of  course,  the  anupadhi- 
j-esha,  Pali  anupadisesa  N. 

2  Or,  perhaps,  without  a  guide,  padavin  tu  vina  'gati/^.  This 
does  not  agree  with  the  prose  version,  but  it  is  not  rare  to  meet 
with  such  discrepancies. 


1 40  SADDHARMA-PU^ZiARiKA.  V. 


self  to  the  wilderness  and  meditate  on  the  pure  law ; 
by  it  thou  shalt  acquire  the  transcendent  faculties. 

72.  The  man  catches  the  meaning,  goes  to  the 
wilderness,  meditates  with  the  greatest  attention, 
and,  as  he  is  endowed  with  good  qualities,  ere  long 
acquires  the  five  transcendent  faculties. 

']^.  Similarly  all  disciples  fancy  having  reached 
Nirva;2a,  but  the  6^ina  instructs  them  (by  saying): 
This  is  a  (temporary)  repose,  no  final  rest. 

74.  It  is  an  artifice  of  the  Buddhas  to  enunciate 
this  dogmas  There  is  no  (real)  Nirva/za  without 
all-knowingness  ;  try  to  reach  this. 

75.  The  boundless  knowledge  of  the  three  paths 
(of  time),  the  six  utmost  perfections  (Paramitas), 
voidness,  the  absence  of  purpose  (or  object),  the 
absence  of  finiteness^; 

76.  The  idea  of  enlightenment  and  the  other  laws 
leading  to  Nirva;/a,  both  such  as  are  mixed  with 
imperfection  and  such  as  are  exempt  from  it,  such 
as  are  tranquil  and  comparable  to  ethereal  space  ; 

77.  The  four  Brahmavih^ras  ^  and  the  four  Sah- 
grahas  S  as  well  as  the  laws  sanctioned  by  eminent 
sagfes  for  the  education  of  creatures  ; 

78.  (He  who  knows  these  things)  and  that  all 
phenomena  have  the  nature  of  illusion  and  dreams, 


^  Of  temporary  repose,  it  would  seem. 

2  Or,  absence  of  fixed  purpose,  prawidhanavivar^itam. 

^  Otherwise  termed  Appamawfia  in  Pali ;  they  are  identical  with 
the  four  bhavanas,  or  exercises  to  develop  benevolence,  com- 
passion, cheerful  sympathy,  and  equanimity,  well  known  from  the 
Yoga;  see  Yoga^astra  I,  33. 

*  Commonly  called  sahgrahavastiani,  Pali  sahgahavatthiani, 
articles  of  sociability,  viz.  liberality,  affability,  promoting  another's 
interest,  and  pursuit  of  a  common  aim;  see  e.g.  Lalita-vistara, 
p.  39, 1. 1. 


V.  ON    PLANTS.  141 

that  they  are  pithless  as  the  stem  of  the  plantain  \ 
and  similar  to  an  echo ; 

79.  And  who  knows  that  the  triple  world  through- 
out is  of  that  nature,  not  fast  and  not  loose,  he 
knows  rest. 

So.  He  who  considers  all  laws^  to  be  alike,  void, 
devoid  of  particularity  and  individuality,  not  derived 
from  an  intelligent  cause ;  nay,  who  discerns  that 
nothingness  is  law^; 

81.  Such  a  one  has  great  wusdom  and  sees  the 
whole  of  the  law  entirely.  There  are  no  three 
vehicles  by  any  means ;  there  is  but  one  vehicle  in 
this  world. 

82.  All  laws  (or  the  laws  of  all)  are  alike,  equal, 
for  all,  and  ever  alike.  Knowing  this,  one  under- 
stands immortal,  blest  Nirva;^a. 

^  Cf.  the  words  of  the  funeral  song  in  Ya^ilavalkya  III,  8  : 
'Foolish  is  he  who  would  seek  pithfulness  in  humanity,  which  is 
pithless  as  the  plantain's  stem  and  resembling  a  water  bubble.' 

^  Or  all  things  ;  or  the  laws  of  all  things. 

^  Sarvadharman  sama(ri)/('  Munya(n)  nirnanakara«atmaka»/  (r. 
'^kan),  na  /^aitan  (I  think  /taittan)  prekshate  napi  kif?i^id  dharmaw 
(sic)  vipajyate.  The  other  MS.  has  sarvadharman  (r.  °man) 
sama(n)  i'unyan  nirnanakara^atmikan,  na  keia.m  prekshate  napi 
kimkid  dharma^z  vinajyati.  The  great  difficulty  lies  in  the  second 
half  verse,  which  is  evidently  corrupt  and  wrongly  Sanskritised,  so 
that  the  correctness  of  the  translation  in  this  respect  is  pro- 
blematical. 


A 


142  SADDHARMA-PUiVZ)ARIKA.  VI. 


CHAPTER   VI. 

ANNOUNCEMENT   OF   FUTURE    DESTINY. 

After  pronouncing  these  stanzas  the  Lord  addressed 
the  complete  assembly  of  monks  :  I  announce  to 
you,  monks,  I  make  known  to  you  that  the  monk 
Ka^yapa,  my  disciple,  here  present,  shall  do  homage 
to  thirty  thousand  ko/is  of  Buddhas ;  shall  respect, 
honour,  and  worship  them ;  and  shall  keep  the 
true  law  of  those  Lords  and  Buddhas.  In  his  last 
bodily  existence^  in  the  world  Avabhasa  (i.  e.  lustre), 
in  the  age  (^on)  Mahavyuha  (i.e.  great  division) 
he  shall  be  a  Tathagata,  an  Arhat,  &c.  &c.,  by  the 
name  of  Ra^-miprabhasa  (i.e.  beaming  with  rays). 
His  lifetime  shall  last  twelve  intermediate  kalpas, 
and  his  true  law  twenty  intermediate  kalpas ;  the 
counterfeit  of  his  true  law  shall  last  as  many  inter- 
mediate kalpas.  His  Buddha-field  will  be  pure, 
clean,  devoid  of  stones,  grit,  gravel;  of  pits  and 
precipices;  devoid  of  gutters  and  dirty  pools 2; 
even,  pretty,  beautiful,  and  pleasant  to  see ;  consist- 
ing of  lapis  lazuli,  adorned  with  jewel-trees,  and 
looking  like  a  checker-board  with  eight  compart- 
ments set  off  with  gold  threads.     It  will  be  strewed 


^  Pajy^ima  samu-^/^/^raya,  which  also  means  western  rise, 
elevation. 

^  Apagatasyandanikagutho^illa, var.lect.^tho^igalla.  My 
rendering  of  the  last  part  of  the  compound  is  conjectural. 


VI.  ANNOUNCEMENT    OF    FUTURE    DESTINY.  1 43 

with  flowers,  and  many  hundred  thousand  Bodhi- 
sattvas  are  to  appear  in  it.  As  to  disciples,  there 
will  be  innumerable  hundred  thousands  of  myriads 
of  ko/is  of  them.  Neither  Mara  the  evil  one,  nor 
his  host  will  be  discoverable  in  it,  though  Mara 
and  his  followers  shall  afterwards  be  there;  for 
they  will  apply  themselves  to  receive  the  true 
law  under  the  command  of  that  very  Lord  Raj"mi- 
prabhasa. 

And  on  that  occasion  the  Lord  uttered  the  fol- 
lowing stanzas  : 

1.  With  my  Buddha-eye,  monks,  I  see  that  the 
senior  Kai'yapa  here  shall  become  a  Buddha  at  a 
future  epoch,  in  an  incalculable  yEon,  after  he  shall 
have  paid  homage  to  the  most  high  of  men. 

2.  This  Kai-yapa  shall  see  fully  thirty  thousand 
ko/is  of  (9inas,  under  whom  he  shall  lead  a  spiritual 
life  for  the  sake  of  Buddha-knowledge. 

3.  After  having  paid  homage  to  those  highest  of 
men  and  acquired  that  supreme  knowledge,  he  shall 
in  his  last  bodily  existence  be  a  Lord  of  the  world,  a 
matchless,  great  Seer. 

4.  And  his  field  will  be  magnificent,  excellent, 
pure,  goodly,  beautiful,  pretty,  nice,  ever  delightful, 
and  set  off  with  gold  threads. 

5.  That  field,  monks,  (appearing  like)  a  board 
divided  into  eight  compartments,  will  have  several 
jewel-trees,  one  in  each  compartment,  from  which 
issues  a  delicious  odour. 

6.  It  will  be  adorned  with  plenty  of  flowers,  and 
embellished  with  variegated  blossoms ;  in  it  are  no 
pits  nor  precipices ;  it  is  even,  goodly,  beautiful. 

7.  There  will  be  found  hundreds  of  ko/is  of  Bo- 
dhisattvas,  subdued  of  mind  and  of  great  magical 


A 


144  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  VI. 

power,  mighty  keepers  ^  of  Sutrantas   of  great  ex- 
tension. 

8.  As  to  disciples,  faultless,  princes  of  the  law, 
standing  in  their  last  period  of  life,  their  number 
can  never  be  known,  even  if  one  should  go  on 
counting  for  ^ons,  and  that  with  the  aid  of  divine 
knowledge. 

9.  He  himself  shall  stay  twelve  intermediate 
kalpas,  and  his  true  law  twenty  complete  ^ons  ; 
the  counterfeit  is  to  continue  as  many  ^ons,  in  the 
domain  of  Rai-miprabhasa. 

Thereupon  the  venerable  senior  Maha-Maudga- 
lyayana,  the  venerable  Subhtati,  and  the  venerable 
Maha-Katyayana,  their  bodies  trembling,  gazed  up 
to  the  Lord  with  unblenching  eyes,  and  at  the  same 
moment  severally  uttered,  in  mental  concert,  the 
following  stanzas  : 

10.  O  hallowed  one  (Arhat),  great  hero,  ^'akya- 
lion,  most  high  of  men !  out  of  compassion  to  us 
speak  the  Buddha-word. 

11.  The  highest  of  men,  the  G'ma.,  he  who  knows 
the  fatal  term,  will,  as  it  were,  sprinkle  us  with  nectar 
by  predicting  our  destiny  also. 

12.  (It  is  as  if)  a  certain  man,  in  time  of  famine, 
comes  and  gets  good  food,  but  to  whom,  when  the 
food  is  already  in  his  hands,  they  say  that  he  should 
wait  ^ 

13.  Similarly  it  was  with  us,  who  after  minding 


^  Vaipulyasutrantadhara^a  tayinam.  Here  the  word  t  ay  in 
would  seem  to  be  used  in  the  sense  of '  able,'  agreeing  with  the 
meaning  of  t  ay  an  a  in  Pacini  I,  3,  38. 

^  Durbhiksha  agata//  kaj/^^in  naro  labdhva  subho^'-ana;«,'pratiksha' 
bhfiya  uX-yeta  hastapraptasmi  bho^ane.  The  Prakrit  underlying  this 
literary  dialect  is  easily  reconstrued. 


VI.  ANNOUNCEMENT    OF   FUTURE    DESTINY.  I45 


the  lower  vehicle,  at  the  calamitous  conjuncture  of  a 
bad  time  ^  were  longing  for  Buddha-knowledge. 

14.  But  the  perfectly-enlightened  great  Seer  has 
not  yet  favoured  us  with  a  prediction  (of  our  des- 
tiny), as  if  he  would  say:  Do  not  eat  the  food 
that  has  been  put  into  your  hand. 

15.  Quite  so,  O  hero,  we  were  longing  as  we 
heard  the  exalted  voice  (and  thought):  Then  shall 
we  be  at  rest  ^  when  we  shall  have  received  a 
prediction. 

16.  Utter  a  prediction,  O  great  hero,  so  benevo- 
lent and  merciful !  let  there  be  an  end  of  our  feeling 
of  poverty ! 

And  the  Lord,  who  in  his  mind  apprehended  the 
thoughts  arising  in  the  minds  of  those  great  senior 
disciples,  again  addressed  the  complete  assembly  of 
monks :  This  great  disciple  of  mine,  monks,  the 
senior  Subhuti,  shall  likewise  pay  homage  to  thirty 
hundred  thousand  myriads  of  ko^is  of  Buddhas  ; 
shall  show  them  respect,  honour,  reverence,  venera- 
tion, and  worship.  Under  them  shall  he  lead  a 
spiritual  life  and  achieve  enlightenment.  After  the 
performance  of  such  duties  shall  he,  in  his  last 
bodily  existence,  become  a  Tathagata  in  the  world, 
an  Arhat,  &c.  &c.,  by  the  name  of  6a5iketu  ^. 

His  Buddha-field  will  be  called  Ratnasambhava 
and  his  epoch  Ratnaprabhasa  ^.  And  that  Buddha- 
field  will  be  even,  beautiful,  crystalline,  variegated 
with  jewel-trees,  devoid  of  pits  and  precipices,  devoid 


^  Dushkalabhagnasandhau. 

^  And  felicitous,  blest,  beatified  (nirvn'ta). 

^  I.  e.  moon-signal,  or  having  the  moon  for  ensign. 

*  Var.  lect.  Ratndvabhasa. 


[21] 


146  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARiKA.  YI. 

of  sewers  ^  nice,  covered  with  flowers.  And  there 
will  men  have  their  abode  in  palaces  (or  towers) 
given  them  for  their  use.  In  it  will  be  many  disci- 
ples, innumerable,  so  that  it  would  be  impossible  to 
terminate  the  calculation.  Many  hundred  thousand 
myriads  of  ko/is  of  Bodhisattvas  also  will  be  there. 
The  lifetime  of  that  Lord  is  to  last  twelve  inter- 
mediate kalpas ;  his  true  law  is  to  continue  twenty 
intermediate  kalpas,  and  its  counterfeit  as  many. 
That  Lord  will,  while  standing  poised  in  the  firma- 
ment 2,  preach  the  law  to  the  monks,  and  educate 
many  thousands  of  Bodhisattvas  and  disciples. 

And  on  that  occasion  the  Lord  uttered  the  fol- 
lowing stanzas : 

17.  I  have  something  to  announce,  monks,  some- 
thing to  make  known ;  listen  then  to  me :  The 
senior  Subhtiti,  my  disciple,  shall  in  days  to  come 
be  a  Buddha. 

18.  After  having  seen  of  most  mighty  Buddhas 
thirty  myriads  of  ko^is  in  full,  he  shall  enter  upon 
the  straight  ^  course  to  obtain  this  knowledge. 

19.  In  his  last  bodily  existence  shall  the  hero, 
possessed  of  the  thirty-two  distinctive  signs,  become 
a  great  Seer,  similar  to  a  column  of  gold,  beneficial 
and  bounteous  to  the  world. 

20.  The  field  where  that  friend  of  the  world* 
shall  save  myriads  of  ko/is  of  living  beings  will  be 
most  beautiful,  pretty,  and  delightful  to  people  at 
large. 

^  Doubtful,  the  MSS.  having  guthofl'igilla  and  gutho</igalla. 

^  Properly,  standing  as  a  great  meteor,  mahavaihayasawz 
sthitva;  vaihayasa  is  exactly  the  Greek  fierecopos. 

^  Anuloma,  direct,  straight;  the  reverse  of  vakragati,  the 
retrograde  motion  of  planets,  &c. 

*  Lokabandhu. 


VI.  ANNOUNCEMENT    OF    FUTURE    DESTINY.  1 47 

21.  In  it  will  be  many  Bodhisattvas  to  turn  the 
wheel  that  never  rolls  back  (or  never  deviates) ;  en- 
dowed with  keen  faculties  they  will,  under  that  6^ina, 
be  the  ornaments  of  the  Buddha-field. 

22.  His  disciples  are  so  numerous  as  to  pass  cal- 
culation and  measure ;  gifted  with  the  six  trans- 
cendent faculties,  the  triple  science  and  magic 
power  ;  firm  in  the  eight  emancipations. 

23.  His  magic  power,  while  he  reveals  supreme 
enlightenment,  is  inconceivable.  Gods  and  men,  as 
numerous  as  the  sands  of  the  Ganges,  will  always 
reverentially  salute  him  with  joined  hands. 

24.  He  shall  stay  twelve  intermediate  kalpas ; 
the  true  law  of  that  most  high  of  men  is  to  last 
twenty  intermediate  kalpas  and  the  counterfeit  of  it 
as  many. 

Again  the  Lord  addressed  the  complete  assembly 
of  monks  :  I  announce  to  you,  monks,  I  make  known 
that  the  senior  Maha-Katyayana  here  present,  my 
disciple,  shall  pay  homage  to  eight  thousand  ko/is 
of  Buddhas ;  shall  show  them  respect,  honour,  re- 
verence, veneration,  and  worship ;  at  the  expiration 
of  those  Tathagatas  he  shall  build  Sttipas,  a  thou- 
sand yo^anas  in  height,  fifty  yo^anas  in  circumference, 
and  consisting  of  seven  precious  substances,  to  wit, 
gold,  silver,  lapis  lazuli,  crystal,  red  pearly  emerald, 
and,  seventhly,  coral  2.  Those  Stiipas  he  shall  worship 

^  Lohitamukti,  according  to  Buddhist  authorities,  red  pearl. 
The  word  is  of  so  frequent  occurrence  that  there  can  be  no 
question  of  muktes  in  the  genitive  case  being  a  clerical  error  for 
muktayas.  If  the  word  ever  had  any  existence  out  of  Buddhist 
writings,  mukti  must  have  been  a  variation  of  mukta. 

^  Musaragalva;  whether  this  precious  stone  really  be  coral, 
as  Buddhist  dictionaries  assert,  is  rather  doubtful.  As  the  enu- 
merated substances  represent   the   seven  colours — originally  the 

L    2 


148  SADDHARMA-PUA^DARIKA.  YI. 

with  flowers,  incense,  perfumed  wreaths,  ointments, 
powder,  robes,  umbrellas,  banners,  flags,  triumphal 
streamers.  Afterwards  he  shall  again  pay  a  similar 
homage  to  twenty  ko/'is  of  Buddhas ;  show  them 
respect,  honour,  reverence,  veneration,  and  worship. 
Then  in  his  last  bodily  existence  ^  his  last  corporeal 
appearance,  he  shall  be  a  Tathagata  in  the  world,  an 
Arhat,  &c.  &c.,  named  G'ambunada-prabhasa (i.e.  gold- 
shine),  endowed  with  science  and  conduct,  &c.  His 
Buddha-field  will  be  thoroughly  pure,  even,  nice, 
pretty,  beautiful,  crystalline,  variegated  with  jewel- 
trees,  interlaced  with  gold  threads,  strewed  with 
flowers,  free  from  beings  of  the  brute  creation,  hell, 
and  the  host  of  demons,  replete  with  numerous 
men  and  gods,  adorned  with  many  hundred  thou- 
sand disciples  and  many  hundred  thousand  Bodhi- 
sattvas.  The  measure  of  his  lifetime  shall  be  twelve 
intermediate  kalpas ;  his  true  law  shall  continue 
twenty  intermediate  kalpas  and  its  counterfeit  as 
many. 

And  on  that  occasion  the  Lord  uttered  the  fol- 
lowing stanzas  : 

25.  Listen  all  to  me,  ye  monks,  since  I  am  going 
to  utter  an  infallible  word  2.  Katyayana  here,  the 
senior,  my  disciple,  shall  render  worship  to  the 
Leaders. 

26.  He  shall  show  veneration  of  various  kinds 
and  in    many   ways    to    the    Leaders,   after   whose 

rainbow  colours,  I  think — the  interpretation  either  of  lohitamukti 
or  of  musaragalva  must  be  wrong,  perhaps  both  are  false. 

^  Properly,  western  elevation  or  rise. 

^  The  Buddha  may  in  sober  truth  say  so,  because  the  astronomer 
can  predict  future  risings  and  settings.  He  here  shows  himself  to 
be  Brahma,  in  his  function  of  the  first  of  astronomers,  to  whom 
the  ancient  Brahma-Siddhanta  is  referred. 


VI.  ANNOUNCEMENT    OF    FUTURE    DESTINY.  1 49 

expiration  he  shall  build  Stupas,  worshipping  them 
with  flowers  and  perfumes. 

27.  In  his  last  bodily  existence  he  shall  be  a 
Gina,  in  a  thoroughly  pure  field,  and  after  acquiring 
full  knowledge  he  shall  preach  to  a  thousand  ko/is 
of  living  beings, 

28.  He  shall  be  a  mighty  Buddha  and  illuminator, 
highly  honoured  in  this  world,  including  the  gods, 
under  the  name  of  6'ambunada-prabhasa  ^,  and  save 
ko/is  of  gods  and  men. 

29.  Many  Bodhlsattvas  as  well  as  disciples,  be- 
yond measure  and  calculation,  will  in  that  field  adorn 
the  reign  of  that  Buddha,  all  of  them  freed  from 
existence  and  exempt  from  existence  ^ 

Again  the  Lord  addressed  the  complete  assembly 
of  monks  ;  I  announce  to  you,  monks,  I  make  known, 
that  the  senior  Maha-Maudgalyayana  here  present, 
my  disciple,  shall  propitiate  twenty-eight  thousand 
Buddhas  ^  and  pay  those  Lords  homage  of  various 
kinds ;  he  shall  show  them  respect.  Sic,  and  after 
their  expiration  build  Stupas  consisting  of  seven 
precious  substances,  to  wit,  gold,  silver,  lapis  lazuli, 
crystal,  red  pearl,  emerald,  and,  seventhly,  coral  ; 
(Stupas)  a  thousand  yq^anas  in  height  and  five 
hundred  yo^anas  in  circumference,  which  Stupas  he 
shall  worship  in  different  ways,  with  flowers,  incense, 
perfumed  wreaths,  ointments,  powder,  robes,  um- 
brellas,   banners,    flags,    and    triumphal    streamers. 

^  One  MS.  has  a  second-hand  reading,  °dabhasa. 

^  Vibhava;  Burnouf  must  have  read  vibhaya,  'exempts  de 
terreur.' 

^  The  number  of  twenty-eight — the  cyphers  not  being  taken  into 
account — probably  indicates  the  number  of  days  (Buddhas)  during 
which  the  planet  is  standing  in  some  stage  of  its  course. 


A 


1 50  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARlKA.  VI. 

Afterwards  he  shall  again  pay  a  similar  worship  to 
twenty^  hundred  thousand  ko/is  of  Buddhas ;  he 
shall  show  respect,  &c.,  and  in  his  last  bodily  exist- 
ence become  in  the  world  a  Tathagata,  &c.,  named 
Tamalapatra/t'andanagandha  ^,  endowed  with  science 
and  conduct,  &c.  The  field  of  that  Buddha  will  be 
called  Manobhirama ;  his  period  Ratipratipur;^a. 
And  that  Buddha-field  will  be  even,  nice,  pretty, 
beautiful,  crystalline,  variegated  with  jewel-trees, 
strewn  with  detached  flowers,  replete  with  gods  and 
men,  frequented  by  hundred  thousands  of  Seers,  that 
is  to  say,  disciples  and  Bodhisattvas.  The  measure 
of  his  lifetime  shall  be  twenty-four  intermediate 
kalpas ;  his  true  law  is  to  last  forty  intermediate 
kalpas  and  its  counterfeit  as  many. 

And  on  that  occasion  the  Lord  uttered  the  fol- 
lowing stanzas : 

30.  The  scion  of  the  Mudgala-race,  my  disciple 
here,  after  leaving^  human  existence  shall  see  twenty 
thousand  mighty*  Cinas  and  eight  (thousand)  more 
of  these  faultless  beings. 

31.  Under  them  he  shall  follow  a  course  of  duty, 
trying  to  reach  Buddha-knowledge ;  he  shall  pay 
homage  in  various  ways  to  those  Leaders  and  to  the 
most  high  of  men. 

32.  After  keeping  their  true  law,  of  wide  reach 
and  sublime,  for  thousands  of  ko/is  of -^ons,  he  shall 
at  the  expiration  of  those  Sugatas  worship  their 
Stiipas. 


^  As  many  days  in  another  stage. 

^  I.  e.  having  the  odour  (or  resemblance)  of  Xanthochymus  and 
sandal.  From  the  dark  colour  I  infer  that  Saturn  is  meant,  for 
this  planet  is  represented  as  being  black. 

^  Gahitva.  *  Tayin. 


VT.  ANNOUNCEMENT    OF    FUTURE    DESTINY.  I5T 

.  , a . — , : . _ 

;^^.  In  honour  of  those  most  high  6^inas,  those 
mighty  beings  ^  so  beneficial  to  the  world,  he  shall 
erect  Stupas  consisting  of  precious  substances,  and 
decorated  with  triumphal  streamers,  worshipping 
them  with  flowers,  perfumes,  and  the  sounds  of 
music. 

34.  At  the  period  of  his  last  bodily  existence  he 
shall,  in  a  nice  and  beautiful  field,  be  a  Buddha 
bounteous  and  compassionate  to  the  world,  under 
the  name  of  Tamalapatra/C'andanagandha. 

35.  The  measure  of  that  Sugata's  life  shall  be 
fully  twenty-four  intermediate  kalpas,  during  which 
he  shall  be  assiduous  in  declaring  the  Buddha-rule 
to  men  and  gods. 

36.  That  6^ina  shall  have  many  thousands  of 
ko/is  of  disciples,  innumerable  as  the  sands  of  the 
Ganges,  gifted  with  the  six  transcendent  faculties 
and  the  triple  science,  and  possessed  of  magic 
power,  under  the  command  of  that  Sugata. 

37.  Under  the  reign  of  that  Sugata  there  shall 
also  appear  numerous  Bodhisattvas,  many  thousands 
of  them,  unable  to  slide  back  (or  to  deviate),  de- 
veloping zeal,  of  extensive  knowledge  and  studious 
habits. 

38.  After  that  6^ina's  expiration  his  true  law 
shall  measure  in  time  twenty-four^  intermediate 
kalpas  in  full ;  its  counterfeit  shall  have  the  same 
measure. 

39.  These  are  my  five  mighty  disciples  whom  I 


^  Tayin. 

"^  The  original  reading  has  been  meddled  with ;  one  MS.  has 
v\ms3.k  k3.\d.77i  (second-hand,  -^a  vim)  syantarakalpa ;  another,  viwsaX- 
ka.  vijantarak°.  The  original  Prakrit  may  have  had  something  like 
viwsa;«  Htwu. 


A 


152  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  VI. 

have  destined  to  supreme  enlightenment  and  to 
become  in  future  self-born  6^inas ;  now  hear  from 
me  their  coursed 


^  In  this  chapter  only  four  disciples  are  mentioned;  the  fifth 
must  be  6'ariputra,  whose  destination  has  been  predicted  before. 


VII.  ANCIENT    DEVOTION.  1 53 


CHAPTER  VII. 

ANCIENT     DEVOTION^ 

Of  yore,  monks,  in  the  past,  incalculable,  more 
than  incalculable,  inconceivable,  immense,  measure- 
less ^ons  since,  nay,  at  a  period,  an  epoch  far 
beyond,  there  appeared  in  the  world  a  Tathagata, 
&c.,  named  Mahabhi^/'^a^^lanabhlbhtj,  endowed  with 
science  and  conduct^,  a  Sugata,  &c.  &c,,  in  the  sphere 
Sambhava  (i.  e.  origin,  genesis),  in  the  period  Maha- 
riipa.  (You  ask),  monks,  how  long  ago  is  it  that 
the  Tathdgata  was  born  ?  Well,  suppose  some  man 
was  to  reduce  to  powder  the  whole  mass  of  the 
earth  element  as  much  as  is  to  be  found  in  this 
whole  universe ;  that  after  taking  one  atom  of  dust 
from  this  world  he  is  to  walk  a  thousand  worlds 
farther  in  easterly  direction  to  deposit  that  single 
atom ;  that  after  taking  a  second  atom  of  dust  and 
walking  a  thousand  worlds  farther  he  deposits  that 
second  atom,  and  proceeding  in  this  way  at  last  gets 
the  whole  of  the  earth  element  deposited  in  eastern 

*  Purvayoga,  which  recurs  as  the  heading  of  chaps.  XXII  and 
XXV,  would  at  first  sight  seem  to  mean  '  former  conjunction,'  but 
that  does  not  answer  any  more  than  '  ancient  devotion.'  I  think 
that  yoga  here  is  an  alteration  of  yuga,  age,  period,  or  a  Pra- 
kritism  for  yauga,  i.e.  referring  to  an  age.  A  Sanskrit  purva- 
yauga  would  be  formed  like  purva-yayata,  &c. ;  cf.  Pamni 
VI,  2,  103.  The  original  meaning  of  purva-yoga  is,  I  sup- 
pose, pre-history.  Cf.  pubbayogo  ti  pubbakamma;;/,  Milinda 
Pafiho,  p.  2. 

^  I.  e.  with  light  and  motion. 


154  .     SADDHARMA-PUiVDARlKA.  VII. 


direction.  Now,  monks,  what  do  you  think  of  it,  is 
it  possible  by  calculation  to  find  the  end  or  limit 
of  these  worlds  ?  They  answered  :  Certainly  not, 
Lord ;  certainly  not,  Sugata.  The  Lord  said  :  On 
the  contrary,  monks,  some  arithmetician  or  master 
of  arithmetic  might,  indeed,  be  able  by  calculation  to 
find  the  end  or  limit  of  the  worlds,  both  those  where 
the  atoms  have  been  deposited  and  where  they  have 
not,  but  it  is  impossible  by  applying  the  rules  of  arith- 
metic to  find  the  limit  of  those  hundred  thousands 
of  myriads  of  ^ons ;  so  long,  so  inconceivable,  so 
immense  is  the  number  of  y^ons  which  have  elapsed 
since  the  expiration  of  that  Lord,  the  Tathagata 
Mahabhi^;7a^;7anabhibhu.  Yet,  monks,  I  perfectly 
remember  that  Tathagata  who  has  been  extinct 
for  so  long  a  time  ^  as  if  he  had  reached  extinction 
to-day  or  yesterday  ^,  because  of  my  possessing  the 
mighty  knowledge  and  sight  of  the  Tathagata. 

And  on  that  occasion  the  Lord  pronounced  the 
following  stanzas : 

1.  I  remember 3  the  great  Seer  Abhi^/7a^7Hna- 
bhibhtj,  the  most  high  of  men,  who  existed  many 
ko/is  of  ^ons  ago  as  the  superior  6^ina  of  the 
period. 

2.  If,  for  example,  some  men  after  reducing  this 


1  Hence  follows  that  the  Buddha  has  existed  since  time  imme- 

A 

morial ;  in  other  words,  that  he  is  Adibuddha. 

2  I  have  taken  the  liberty  to  render  j-vas  by  'yesterday,'  though 
I  have  no  other  warrant  for  the  word  ever  being  taken  in  this 
sense  except  the  context  and  the  fact  that  in  sundry  languages 
the  notions  of  to-morrow  and  yesterday  are  occasionally  expressed 
by  the  same  term,  e.g.  Hindi  kal  (properly  morning,  to-morrow, 
Sansk.  kalyam,  kalyam);  the  English 'yesterday'  is  the  very  same 
word  with  Gothic  gistradagis,  to-morrow. 

^  Anusmarami,  omitted  by  Burnouf. 


VII.  ANCIENT    DEVOTION.  155 

universe  to  atoms  of  dust  took  one  atom  to  deposit 
it  a  thousand  regions  farther  on ; 

3.  If  he  deposited  a  second,  a  third  atom,  and  so 
proceeded  until  he  had  done  with  the  whole  mass  of 
dust,  so  that  this  world  were  empty  and  the  mass 
of  dust  exhausted ; 

4.  To  that  immense  mass  of  the  dust  of  these 
worlds,  entirely  reduced  to  atoms,  I  liken  the  num- 
ber of  ^ons  past. 

5.  So  immense  is  the  number  of  ko/is  of  i^ons 
past  since  that  extinct  Sugata ;  the  whole  of  (ex- 
isting) atoms  is  no  (adequate)  expression  of  it ;  so 
many  are  the  ^ons  which  have  expired  since. 

6.  That  Leader  who  has  expired  so  long  ago,  those 
disciples  and  Bodhisattvas,  I  remember  all  of  them 
as  if  it  were  to-day  or  yesterday.  Such  is  the 
knowledge  of  the  Tathagatas. 

7.  So  endless,  monks,  is  the  knowledge  of  the 
Tathagata ;  I  know  what  has  taken  place  many 
hundreds  of  iEons  ago,  by  my  precise  and  faultless 
memory. 

To  proceed,  monks,  the  measure  of  the  lifetime  of 
the  Tathagata  Mahabhi^;1a^7^anabhibhu,  the  Arhat, 
&c.  was  fifty-four  hundred  thousand  myriads  of 
ko/is  of  /Eons. 

In  the  beginning  when  the  Lord  had  not  yet 
reached  supreme,  perfect  enlightenment  and  had  just 
occupied  the  summit  of  the  terrace  of  enlighten- 
ment ^  he  discomfited  and  defeated  the  whole  host 
of  Mara,  after  which  he  thought :    I  am  to  reach 

^  Bodhima;/</avaragragata  eva;  var.lect.  bodhima?;6^avaragata  eva, 
i.  e.  just  having  come  to  the  terrace  of  enlightenment.  Vara  here 
is  vara,  circuit;  it  adds  Uttle  to  the  notion  of  the  simple  bodhi- 
maw^a,  this  also  being  a  round  terrace. 


156  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARflvA.  TIT, 

perfect  enlightenment  \  But  those  laws  (of  perfect 
enlightenment)  had  not  yet  dawned  upon  him.  He 
stayed  on  the  terrace  of  enlightenment  at  the  foot  of 
the  tree  of  enlio^htenment  during-  one  intermediate 
kalpa.  He  stayed  there  a  second,  a  third  inter- 
mediate kalpa,  but  did  not  yet  attain  supreme,  per- 
fect enlightenment.  He  remained  a  fourth,  a  fifth,  a 
sixth,  a  seventh,  an  eighth,  a  ninth,  a  tenth  inter- 
mediate kalpa  on  the  terrace  of  enlightenment  at 
the  foot  of  the  tree  of  enlightenment  2,  continuing 
sitting  cross-legged  without  in  the  meanwhile  rising. 
He  stayed,  the  mind  motionless,  the  body  unstirring 
and  untrembling,  but  those  laws  had  not  yet  dawned 
upon  him. 

Now,  monks,  while  the  Lord  was  just  on  the 
summit  of  the  terrace  of  enlightenment,  the  gods  of 
Paradise  (Trayastri/z/i-as)  prepared  him  a  magnificent 
royal  throne,  a  hundred  yo^anas  high,  on  occupying 
which  the  Lord  attained  supreme,  perfect  enlighten- 
ment ;  and  no  sooner  had  the  Lord  occupied  the  seat 
of  enlightenment  than  the  Brahmakayika  gods  scat- 
tered a  rain  of  flowers  all  around  the  seat  of  en- 
lightenment over  a  distance  of  a  hundred  yo^anas ; 
in  the  sky  they  let  loose  storms  by  which  the  flowers, 
withered,  were  swept  away.  From  the  beginning 
of  the  rain  of  flowers,  while  the  Lord  was  sitting 
on  the  seat  of  enlightenment,  it  poured  without 
interruption  during  fully  ten  intermediate  kalpas  ^, 

^  It  is  difficult  not  to  see  that  we  have  here,  as  well  as  in  the 
opening  of  the  Mahavagga  and  in  Lalita-vistara,  chap,  21,  a 
description  of  the  rising  of  the  sun,  the  beginning  of  a  kalpa, 
a  myth  of  the  creation  of  the  visible  world. 

^  The  so-called  Bo-tree. 

^  An  intermediate  kalpa  is  the  twentieth  part  of  an  incalculable 
kalpa,  which  in  reality  is  equal  to  one  day  of  twenty-four  hours, 


VII.  ANCIENT    DEVOTION.  1 57 


covering  the  Lord.  That  rani  of  flowers  having  once 
begun  falHng  continued  to  the  moment  of  the  Lord's 
complete  Nirva;/a.  The  angels  belonging  to  the 
division  of  the  four  guardians  of  the  cardinal  points 
made  the  celestial  drums  of  the  gods  resound^;  they 
made  them  resound  without  interruption  in  honour 
of  the  Lord  who  had  attained  the  summit  of  the 
terrace  of  enlightenment.  Thereafter,  during  fully 
ten  intermediate  kalpas,  they  made  uninterruptedly 
resound  those  celestial  musical  instruments  up  to  the 
moment  of  the  complete  extinction  of  the  Lord. 

Again,  monks,  after  the  lapse  of  ten  Interme- 
diate kalpas -the  Lord  Mahabhi^;7a^7/anabhibh{i,  the 
Tathagata,  &c.,  reached  supreme,  perfect  enlighten- 
ment^. Immediately  on  knowing  his  having  become 
enlightened  the  sixteen^  sons  born  to  that  Lord 
when  a  prince  royal,  the  eldest  of  whom  was  named 
6^;Hnakara — which  sixteen  young  princes,  monks, 
had  severally  toys  to  play  with,  variegated  and 
pretty — those  sixteen  princes,  I  repeat,  monks,  left 
their  toys,  their  amusements,  and  since  they  knew 
that  the  Lord  Mahabhi^f^a^/^anabhibhCi,  the  Tatha- 
gata, &c.,  had  attained  supreme,  perfect  knowledge, 
went,  surrounded  and  attended  by  their  weeping 
mothers  and  nurses,  along  with  the  noble,  rich 
king  iTakravartln,  many  ministers,  and  hundred 
thousands  of  myriads  of  ko/Is  of  living  beings,  to  the 
place  where  the  Lord  Mahabhi^/H^/^anabhibhti,  the 

consequently  ten  intermediate  kalpas  are  equal  to  one  day  (half  day- 
night)  of  twelve  hours,  from  sunrise  until  sunset  at  the  equinox. 

^  It  must  have  been  a  stormy  day,  far  from  rare  about  the  time 
of  the  equinoxes. 

^  Just  at  sunset. 

^  Sixteen  is  the  number  of  the  kalas  (digits)  of  the  moon. 


158  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARiKA.  VII. 

Tath^gata,  &c.,  was  seated  on  the  summit  of  the 
terrace  of  enlightenment.  They  went  up  to  the 
Lord  in  order  to  honour,  respect,  worship,  revere, 
and  venerate  him,  saluted  his  feet  with  their  heads, 
made  three  turns  round  him  keeping  him  to  the 
rio-ht  ^UIfted  up  their  joined  hands,  and  praised  the 
Lord,  face  to  face,  with  the  following  stanzas : 

8.  Thou  art  the  great  physician  ^  having  no 
superior,  rendered  perfect  in  endless  ^ons  ^  Thy 
benign  wish  of  saving  all  mortals  (from  darkness) 
has  to-day  been  fulfilled. 

9.  Most  difficult  things  hast  thou  achieved*  during 
the  ten  intermediate  kalpas  now  past-;  thou  hast 
been  sitting  all  that  time  without  once  moving  thy 
body,  hand,  foot,  or  any  other  part  '\ 

10.  Thy  mind  also  was  tranquil  and  steady,  mo- 
tionless, never  to  be  shaken ;  thou  knewest  no 
distraction^;  thou  art  completely  quiet  and  faultless. 

11.  Joy  with  thee^!  that  thou  so  happily  and  safely. 


^  And,  moving  from  east  to  south,  and  so  forth. 

^  Like  Apollo.  Therefore  the  Buddha  immediately  after  his 
bodhi,  i.e.  awakening,  pronounces  the  four  Aryasatyani,  which 
are  nothing  else  but  the  well-known  four  chief  points  in  the 
medical  art, — the  disease,  the  cause  of  the  disease,  necessity  to 
remove  that  cause,  and  the  remedy. 

^  And,  of  infinite  body;  and,  whose  pharmacology  is  boundless; 
anantakalpa  is  the  term  used. 

*  Out  of  a  figure  similar  and  akin  to  Hercules,  the  active  Nara- 
ya«a  has  become  a  sage  tranquil,  peaceful,  and  refraining  from 
action. 

^  Deja.  This  immovability  must  be  taken  cum  grano  salis, 
in  so  far  as  the  sun  is  represented  to  continue  in  the  same  portion 
of  the  ecliptic  for  one  day, 

®  Vikshepa  as  an  astronomical  term  means  celestial  latitude; 
the  sun  knows  no  deviation  from  the  ecliptic,  of  course. 

1  Dish/yasi. 


VII.  ANCIENT    DEVOTION.  1 59 

without  any  hurt,  hast  reached  supreme  enhghten- 
ment.  How  great  a  fortune  is  ours !  we  congratu- 
late ourselves,  O  Lion  amongst  kings ! 

12.  These  unhappy^  creatures,  vexed  in  all  ways, 
deprived  of  eyes,  as  it  were,  and  joyless,  do  not  find 
the  road  leading  to  the  end  of  toils,  nor  develop 
energy  for  the  sake  of  deliverance. 

13.  Dangers  are  for  a  long  time  on  the  increase, 
and  the  laws  (or  phenomena,  things)  are  deprived  of 
the  (possession  of  a)  celestial  body  ;  the  word  of  the 
6"ina  is  not  being  heard;  the  whole  world  is  plunged 
in  thick  darkness. 

14.  But  to-day  (or  now)  hast  thou.  Majesty  of  the 
world,  reached  this  hallowed,  high,  and  faultless 
spot ;  we  as  well  as  the  world  are  obliged  to  thee, 
and  approach  to  seek  our  refuge  with  thee,  O 
Protector ! 

When,  O  monks,  those  sixteen  princes  in  the 
condition  of  boys,  childlike  and  young,  had  with 
such  stanzas  celebrated  the  Lord  Mahabhi^;^a^77ana- 
bhibhu,  the  Tathagata,  &c.,  they  urged  the  Lord  to 
move  on  the  wheel  of  the  law  ^ :  Preach  the  law,  O 
Lord  ;  preach  the  law,  O  Sugata,  for  the  weal  of  the 
public,  the  happiness  of  the  public,  out  of  compas- 
sion for  the  world ;  for  the  benefit,  weal,  and  happi- 
ness of  the  people  generally,  both  of  gods  and  men. 
And  on  that  occasion  they  uttered  the  following 
stanzas  : 

15.  Preach  the  law,  O  thou  who  art  marked  with 
a  hundred  auspicious  signs,  O  Leader,  O  incom- 
parable   great    Seer !    thou    hast   attained    exalted, 


^  Anayika,  derived  from  an  and  aya. 

'  I.  e.  to  rise  a  second  day,  to  awaken  from  liis  Nirvawa. 


l6o  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  VII. 

sublime  knowledge ;  let  it  shine  in  the  world,  includ- 
ing the  gods. 

1 6.  Release  us  as  well  as  these  creatures  ;  display 
the  knowledge  of  the  Tathagatas,  that  we  also  and, 
further,  these  beings  may  obtain  this  supreme  ^ 
enlightenment. 

17.  Thou  knowest  every  course  (of  duty)  and 
knowledge ;  thou  knowest  the  (mental  and  moral) 
disposition  and  the  good  works  done  in  a  former 
state  ;  the  (natural)  bent  of  all  living  beings.  Move 
on  the  most  exalted,  sublime  wheel ! 

Then,  monks,  as  the  Lord  Mahabhi^;7a^/7ana- 
bhibhu,  the  Tathagata,  &c.,  reached  supreme,  per- 
fect enlightenment,  fifty  hundred  thousand  myriads 
of  ko/is  of  spheres  in  each  of  the  ten  directions 
of  space  were  shaken  in  six  different  ways  and  be- 
came illumined  with  a  great  lustre.  And  in  the 
intervals  between  all  those  spheres,  in  the  dreary 
places  of  dark  gloom,  where  even  the  sun  and  moon, 
so  powerful,  mighty,  and  splendid,  have  no  advan- 
tage of  the  shining  power  they  are  endowed  with, 
have  no  advantage  of  the  colour  and  brightness  they 
possess,  even  in  those  places  a  great  lustre  arose 
instantly.  And  the  beings  who  appeared  ^  in  those 
intervals  behold  each  other,  acknowledge  each  other, 
(and  exclaim) :  Lo,  there  are  other  beings  also  here 
appearing!  lo,  there  are  other  beings  also  here 
appearing !  The  palaces  and  aerial  cars  of  the  gods 
in  all  those  spheres  up  to  the  Brahma-world  shook 
in  six  different  ways  and  became  illumined  with  a 

^  Or,  foremost;  the  word  used  being  agra. 

^  Upapanna,  by  so-called  aupapaduka  (Pali  opapatika), 
apparitional  birth,  birth  by  metamorphosis.  Clouds  e.  g.  are  so 
born. 


VII.  ANCIENT    DEVOTION.  l6l 

great  lustre,  surpassing  the  divine  majesty  of  the 
gods.  So  then,  monks,  a  great  earthquake  and  a 
great,  sublime  lustre  arose  simultaneously.  And  the 
aerial  cars  of  the  Brahma-angels  to  the  east,  in  these 
fifty  hundred  thousand  myriads  of  ko^is  of  spheres, 
began  excessively  to  glitter,  glow,  and  sparkle  in 
splendour  and  glory.  And  those  Brahma-angels 
made  this  reflection  :  What  may  be  foreboded  by 
these  aerial  cars  so  excessively  glittering,  glowing, 
and  sparkling  in  splendour  and  glory  ?  Thereupon, 
monks,  the  Brahma-angels  in  the  fifty  hundred  thou- 
sand myriads  of  ko/is  of  spheres  went  all  to  each 
other's  abodes  and  communicated  the  matter  to  one 
another.  After  that,  monks,  the  great  Brahma-angel, 
named  Sarvasattvatratr^  (i.e.  Saviour  of  all  beings) \ 
addressed  the  numerous  host  of  Brahma-angfels  in 
the  following  stanzas  : 

1 8.  Our  aerial  cars  to-day  (or  now)  are  all  brist- 
ling ^  with  rays  in  an  extraordinary  degree,  and 
blazing  in  beautiful  splendour  and  brilliancy.  What 
may  be  the  cause  of  it  ? 

19.  Come,  let  us  investigate  the  matter,  what 
divine  being  has  to-day  sprung  into  existence, 
whose  power,  such  as  was  never  seen  before,  here 
now  appears  ? 

20.  Or  should  it  be  the  Buddha,  the  king  of 
kings,  who  to-day  has  been  born  somewhere  in  the 
world,  and  whose  birth  is  announced  by  such  a 
token  that  all  the  points  of  the  horizon  are  now 
blazing  in  splendour  ? 

Thereupon,  monks,  the  great  Brahma-angels  in  the 

^  Probably  a  veiled  name  of  the  regent  of  the  eastern  quarter, 
Indra,  one  of  whose  epithets  is  Sutraman. 
^  Harshita. 

[21]  M 


A 


162  SADDHARMA-PUiVZ)ARIKA.  YII 


fifty  hundred  thousand  myriads  of  ko/is  of  spheres 
mounted  all  together  their  own  divine  aerial  cars, 
took  with  them  divine  bags,  as  large  as  Mount 
Sumeru,  with  celestial  flowers,  and  went  through  the 
four  quarters  successively  until  they  arrived  at  the 
western  quarter,  where  those  great  Brahma-angels, 
O  monks,  stationed  in  the  western  quarter,  saw  the 
Lord  Mahabhi^;7a^;1anabhibhu,  the  Tathagata,  &c., 
on  the  summit  of  the  exalted  terrace  of  enlighten- 
ment, seated  on  the  royal  throne  at  the  foot  of  the 
tree  of  enlightenment  \  surrounded  and  attended 
by  gods,  Nagas,  goblins,  Gandharvas,  demons, 
Garu^as,  Kinnaras,  great  serpents,  men,  and  beings 
not  human,  while  his  sons,  the  sixteen  young  princes, 
were  urging  him  to  move  forward  the  wheel  of  the 
law.  On  seeing  which  the  Brahma-angels  came  up  to 
the  Lord,  saluted  his  feet  with  their  heads,  walked 
many  hundred  thousand  times  round  him  from  left  to 
right,  strewing  (flowers)  and  overwhelming  both  him 
and  the  tree  of  enlightenment,  over  a  distance  of  ten 
yo^anas,  with  those  flower-bags  as  large  as  Mount 
Sumeru.  After  that  they  presented  to  the  Lord  their 
aerial  cars  (with  the  words):  Accept,  O  Lord,  these 
aerial  cars  out  of  compassion  to  us ;  use,  O  Sugata, 
those  cars  out  of  compassion  to  us. 

On  that  occasion,  monks,  after  presenting  their 
own  cars  to  the  Lord,  the  Brahma-angels  celebrated 
the  Lord,  face  to  face,  with  the  following  seasonable 
stanzas : 

21.  A  (or  the)  wonderful,  matchless  Cina,  so 
beneficial  and  merciful,  has  arisen  in  the  world. 
Thou  art  born  a  protector,  a  ruler  (and  teacher),  a 
master  ;  to-day  all  quarters  are  blessed. 

^  The  sun  rises  the  second  day. 


VII.  ANCIENT    DEVOTION.  1 63 

2  2.  We  have  come  as  far  as  fully  fifty  thousand 
ko/is  of  worlds  from  here  to  humbly  salute  the  6^ina 
by  surrendering  our  lofty  aeriel  cars  all  together. 

23.  We  possess  these  variegated  and  bright  cars, 
owing  to  previous  works ;  accept  them  to  oblige  us, 
and  make  use  of  them  to  thine  heart's  content,  O 
Knower  of  the  world ! 

After  the  great  Brahma-angels,  monks,  had  cele- 
brated the  Lord  Mahabhi^;/a^;/anabhibh<i,the  Tatha- 
gata,  &c.,  face  to  face,  with  these  seasonable  stanzas, 
they  besought  him,  saying :  May  the  Lord  move 
forward  the  wheel  of  the  law !  May  the  Lord  preach 
final  rest !  May  the  Lord  release  all  beings !  Be 
favourable,  O  Lord,  to  this  world !  Preach  the  law, 
O  Lord,  to  this  world,  including  gods,  Maras,  and 
Brahma-angels  ;  to  all  people,  including  ascetics  and 
Brahmans,  gods  ^  men,  and  demons  !  It  will  tend  to 
the  weal  of  the  public,  to  the  happiness  of  the  public ; 
out  of  mercy  to  the  world,  for  the  benefit  and  hap- 
piness of  the  people  at  large,  both  gods  and  men. 

Thereupon,  monks,  those  fifty  hundred  thousand 
myriads  of  ko/is  of  Brahma-angels  addressed  the 
Lord,  with  one  voice,  in  common  chorus  ^  with  the 
following  stanza  : 

24.  Show  the  law,  O  Lord  ;  show  it,  O  most  high 
of  men  !  Show  the  power  of  thy  kindness  ;  save  the 
tormented  beingrs. 

25.  Rare^   is   the  light*   of  the  world   like    the 


^  The  gods  have  been  enumerated  just  before  ;  therefore  it  would 
seem  that  gods,  men,  and  demons  here  are  veiled  expressions  for 
kings  or  Kshatriyas,  Vaijyas,  and  ^Yidras. 

^  MSS.  sometimes  samasangitya,  but  more  frequently  s  am  a  wz 
s.,  i.  e.  all  together  in  chorus  or  concert. 

'  And,  precious,  durlabha.  *  Pradyota. 

M  2 


1 64  SAUDHARMA-PUiVDARiKA.  VII. 

blossom  of  the  glomerated  fig-tree.  Thou  hast 
arisen,  O  great  Hero ;  we  pray  to  thee,  the 
Tathagata. 

And  the  Lord,  O  monks,  silently  intimated  his 
assent  to  the  Brahma-angels. 

Somewhat  later,  monks,  the  aerial  cars  of  the 
Brahma-angels  in  the  south-eastern  quarter  in  the 
fifty  hundred  thousand  myriads  of  spheres  began 
excessively  to  glitter,  glow,  and  sparkle  in  splendour 
and  glory.  And  those  Brahma-angels  made  this 
reflection  :  What  may  be  foreboded  by  these  aerial 
cars  so  excessively  glittering,  glowing,  and  sparkling 
in  splendour  and  glory?  Thereupon,  monks,  the 
Brahma-angels  in  the  fifty  hundred  thousand  myriads 
of  ko/is  of  spheres  went  all  to  each  other's  abodes 
and  communicated  the  matter  to  one  another. 
After  that,  monks,  the  great  Brahma-angel,  named 
Adhimatrakaru;^ika  (i.e.  exceedingly  compassionate), 
addressed  the  numerous  host  of  Brahma-angels  with 
the  following  stanzas : 

26.  What  foretoken  is  it  we  see  to-day  (or  now), 
friends  ?  Who  or  what  is  foreboded  by  the  celes- 
tial cars  shining  with  such  uncommon  glory  .'* 

27.  May,  perhaps,  some  blessed  divine  being 
have  come  hither,  by  whose  power  all  these  aerial 
cars  are  illumined  ? 

28.  Or  may  the  Buddha,  the  most  high  of  men, 
have  appeared  in  this  world,  that  by  his  power  these 
celestial  cars  are  in  such  a  condition  as  we  see 
them  ? 

29.  Let  us  all  together  go  and  search  ;  no  trifle  can 
be  the  cause  of  it  ;  such  a  foretoken,  indeed,  was 
never  seen  before  \ 

^  Viz.  in  the  same  kalpa,  i.  e.  on  that  same  day. 


VII.  ANCIENT    DEVOTION.  1 65 

30.  Come,  let  us  go  and  visit  ko/is  of  fields,  along 
the  four  quarters ;  a  Buddha  will  certainly  now  have 
made  his  appearance  in  this  world. 

Thereupon,  monks,  the  great  Brahma-angels  in  the 
fifty  hundred  thousand  myriads  of  ko/is  of  spheres 
mounted  all  together  their  own  divine  aerial  cars, 
took  with  them  divine  bags,  as  large  as  Mount 
Sumeru,  with  celestial  flowers,  and  went  through  the 
four  quarters  successively  until  they  arrived  at  the 
north-western  quarter,  where  those  great  Brahma- 
angels,  stationed  in  the  north-western  quarter,  saw 
the  Lord  Mahabhi^;'2a^;lanabhibhu  [&c.,  as  above 
till  compassion  to  us]. 

On  that  occasion,  monks,  after  presenting  their 
own  cars  to  the  Lord  the  Brahma-angels  celebrated 
the  Lord,  face  to  face,  with  the  following  seasonable 
stanzas : 

31.  Homage  to  thee,  matchless  great  Seer,  chief 
god  of  gods,  whose  voice  is  sweet  as  the  lark's  \ 
Leader  in  the  world,  including  the  gods,  I  salute 
thee,  who  art  so  benign  and  bounteous  to  the  world. 

32.  How  wonderful,  O  Lord,  is  it  that  after  so 
long  a  time  thou  appearest  in  the  world  ^.  Eighty 
hundred  complete  ^ons  this  world  of  the  living  was 
without  Buddha  ^ 


'  Kalavihka,  which  I  have  freely  rendered  in  this  manner, 
commonly  denotes  a  sparrow,  but  the  corresponding  Pali  word 
kuravika  is  supposed  to  be  the  Indian  cuckoo,  the  koil,  which  in 
Indian  poetry  may  be  said  to  answer  to  our  nightingale ;  in  so  far 
one  might  perhaps  render  kalavihka  by  nightingale. 

^  Consequently  it  was  not  for  the  first  time  that  he  appeared. 

^  I  do  not  understand  this  reckoning,  unless  ^on  (kalpa)  here 
be  taken  in  the  sense  of  intermediate  kalpa.  A  mahakalpa  is  the 
period  elapsing  from  the  commencement  of  the  world's  destruction 
(i.  e.  sunset)  to  its  complete  restoration  (i.  e.  sunrise).     So,  indeed, 


1 66  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARiKA.  YIL 

33.  It  was  deprived  of  the  most  high  of  men;  hell 
was  prevailing  and  the  celestial  bodies  constantly 
went  on  waning  during  eighty  hundred  complete 
^ons. 

34.  But  now  he  has  appeared,  owing  to  our  good 
works,  who  is  (our)  eye,  refuge,  resting-place  ^  pro- 
tection, father,  and  kinsman  ^ ;  he,  the  benign  and 
bounteous  one,  the  King  of  the  law. 

After  the  great  Brahma-angels,  monks,  had  cele- 
brated the  Lord  Mahabhi^;7a^;1anabhibhu,the  Tatha- 
gata,  &c.,  face  to  face,  with  these  seasonable  stanzas, 
they  besought  him  :  May  the  Lord  move  forward  the 
wheel  of  the  law!  [as  above  till  both  gods  and 
men.] 

Thereupon,  monks,  those  fifty  hundred  thousand 
myriads  of  ko/is  of  Brahma-angels  addressed  the 
Lord,  with  one  voice,  in  common  chorus,  with  the 
following  stanzas : 

35.  Move  forward  the  exalted  wheel,  O  great 
ascetic !  reveal  the  law  in  all  directions ;  deliver  all 
beings  oppressed  with  suffering^;  produce  amongst 
mortals  gladness  and  joy ! 

36.  Let  them  by  hearing  the  law  partake  of  en- 
lightenment and  reach  divine  places.  Let  all  shake 
off  their  demon  body  and  be  peaceful,  meek,  and  at 
ease  *. 

the  Buddha  has  been  absent  for  a  kalpa,  such  a  kalpa  — mahakalpa 
contains  4  asahkhyeya-kalpas  ;  each  asahkhyeya-kalpa  has  20  in- 
termediate kalpas  ;  hence  a  mahakalpa =80  intermediate  kalpas. 

^  Lena,  Sansk.  layana.  In  Burnouf's  translation  we  find  this 
word  rendered  by  appui. 

^  The  sun  is  lokabandhu,  the  kinsman  and  friend  of  the 
world,  of  mankind. 

^  Or  relieve  all  beings  oppressed  with  toil. 

*  It  is  not  easy  to  say  what  is  really  meant  by  those  divine 


VII.  ANCIENT    DEVOTION.  1 67 

And  the  Lord,  O  monks,  silently  intimated  his 
assent  to  these  Brahma-angels  also. 

Somewhat  later,  monks,  the  aerial  cars  of  the 
Brahma-angels  in  the  southern  quarter  [&c.,  as 
above  till  to  one  another].  After  that,  monks,  the 
great  Brahma-angel,  named  Sudharma  \  addressed 
the  numerous  host  of  Brahma-angels  in  stanzas  : 

2,^.  It  cannot  be  without  cause  or  reason,  friends, 
that  to-day  (or  now)  all  these  celestial  cars  are  so 
brilliant ;  this  bespeaks  some  portent  somewhere  in 
the  world.  Come,  let  us  go  and  investigate  the 
matter. 

38.  No  such  portent  has  appeared  in  hundreds  of 
.^ons  past.  Either  some  god  has  been  born  or  a 
Buddha  has  arisen  in  this  world. 

Thereupon,  monks,  the  great  Brahma-angels  in  the 
fifty  hundred  thousand  myriads  of  ko/is  of  spheres 
mounted  [&c.,  as  above^  till  compassion  to  us]. 

On  that  occasion,  monks,  after  presenting  their 
own  cars  to  the  Lord,  the  Brahma-angels  celebrated 
the  Lord,  face  to  face,  with  the  following  seasonable 
stanzas : 

39.  Most  rare  (and  precious)  is  the  sight  of  the 
Leaders.  Be  welcome,  thou  dispeller  of  worldly 
defilement.  It  is  after  a  long  time  that  thou  now 
appearest  in  the  world ;  after  hundreds  of  complete 
yEons  one  (now)  beholds  thee. 

40.  Refresh  the  thirsty  creatures,  O  Lord  of  the 

places ;  I  think  the  temples  and  shrines  to  be  visited  in  the 
morning. 

^  Of  course  Dharma,  Yama,  the  regent  of  the  south.  The  name 
here  applied  to  him  is  derived  from  Sudharma,  Yama's  hall. 

^  Save  the  substitution  of  '  northern  quarter '  to  '  north-western 
quarter,' 


1 68  SADDHARMA-PUiV2)ARiKA.  VII. 

world!  Now  first  thou  art  seen^;  it  is  not  easy  to 
behold  thee.  As  rare  (or  precious)  as  the  flowers  of 
the  glomerated  fig-tree  is  thine  appearance,  O  Lord. 

41.  By  thy  power  these  aerial  cars  of  ours  are  so 
uncommonly  illumined  now,  O  Leader.  To  show  us 
thy  favour  accept  them,  O  thou  whose  look  pierces 
everywhere ! 

After  the  great  Brahma-angels,  monks,  had  cele- 
brated the  Lord  Mahabhi^;7a^;/anabhibhu,  the  Tatha- 
gata,  &c.,  face  to  face,  with  these  seasonable  stanzas, 
they  besought  him  :  May  the  Lord  move  forward  the 
wheel  of  the  law !  [as  above  till  gods  and  men.] 

Thereupon,  monks,  those  fifty  hundred  thousand 
myriads  of  ko/is  of  Brahma-angels  addressed  the 
Lord,  with  one  voice,  in  common  chorus,  with  the 
following  stanzas  : 

42.  Preach  the  law,0  Lord  and  Leader !  move  for- 
ward the  wheel  of  the  law,  make  the  drum  of  the  law 
resound,  and  blow  the  conch-trumpet  of  the  law. 

43.  Shed  the  rain  of  the  true  law  over  this  world 
and  proclaim  the  sweet-sounding  good  word ;  mani- 
fest the  law  required,  save  myriads  of  ko/is  of 
beings. 

And  the  Lord,  monks,  silently  intimated  his  assent 
to  the  Brahma-angels. 

Repetition ;  the  same  occurred  in  the  south-west, 
in  the  west,  in  the  north-west,  in  the  north,  in  the 
north-east,  in  the  nadir. 

Then,  monks,  the  aerial  cars  of  the  Brahma- 
angels  in  the  nadir  2,  in  those  fifty  hundred  thousand 
myriads   of  ko/Is    of  spheres  [&c.,  as   above   till 

^  We  must  in  thought  add,  in  full  glory,  because  we  are  at 
noontide. 

^  Yenadhodigbhaga. 


VII.  ANCIENT    DEVOTION.  1 69 

to  one  another].  After  that,  monks,  the  great 
Brahma-angel,  named  ^'ikhin,  addressed  the  nu- 
merous host  of  Brahma-angels  with  the  following 
stanzas  : 

44.  What  may  be  the  cause,  O  friends,  that  our 
cars  are  so  bright  with  splendour,  colour,  and  light  ? 
What  may  be  the  reason  of  their  being  so  exceed- 
ingly glorious  ? 

45.  We  have  seen  nothing  like  this  before  nor 
heard  of  it  from  others.  These  (cars)  are  now 
bright  with  splendour  and  exceedingly  glorious ; 
what  may  be  the  cause  of  it  ? 

46.  Should  it  be  some  god  who  has  been  be- 
stowed upon^  the  world  in  recompense  of  good 
works,  and  whose  grandeur  thus  comes  to  light  ? 
Or  is  perhaps  a  Buddha  born  in  the  world  ? 

Thereupon,  monks,  the  great  Brahma-angels  in  the 
fifty  hundred  thousand  myriads  of  ko/is  of  spheres 
mounted  all  together  their  own  divine  aerial  cars, 
took  with  them  divine  bags,  as  large  as  Mount 
Sumeru,  with  celestial  flowers,  and  went  through  the 
four  quarters  successively  until  they  arrived  at  the 
zenith,  where  those  great  Brahma-angels,  stationed 
at  the  zenith,  saw  the  Lord  Mahabhi^;7a^;7anabhibhu 
[&c.,  as  above  till  compassion  to  us]. 

On  that  occasion,  monks,  after  presenting  their 
own  cars  to  the  Lord,  the  Brahma-angels  celebrated 
the  Lord,  face  to  face,  with  the  following  seasonable 
stanzas  : 

47.  How  goodly  is  the  sight  of  the  Buddhas,  the 
mighty  ^  Lords  of  the  world ;  those  Buddhas  who 
are  to  deliver  all  beings  in  this  triple  world. 

^  Samarpita.  ^  Tayin. 


1 70  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARtKA.  VIL 

48.  The  all-seeing  Masters  of  the  world  send 
their  looks  in  all  directions  of  the  horizon,  and  by 
opening  the  gate  of  immortality  ^  they  make  people 
reach  the  (safe)  shore  ^. 

49.  An  inconceivable  number  of  ^ons  now  past 
were  void,  and  all  quarters  wrapt  in  darkness,  as  the 
chief  (S'inas  did  not  appear. 

50.  The  dreary  hells,  the  brute  creation  and 
demo  nswere  on  the  increase ;  thousands  of  ko/is  of 
living  beings  fell  into  the  state  of  ghosts  ^ 

51.  The  heavenly  bodies  were  on  the  wane  ;  after 
their  disappearance  they  entered  upon  evil  ways ; 
their  course  became  wrong  because  they  did  not 
hear  the  law  of  the  Buddhas. 

52.  AH  creatures  lacked  dutiful  behaviour*,  purity, 
good  stated  and  understanding;  their  happiness 
was  lost,   and  the  consciousness  of  happiness  was 

gone. 

53.  They  did  not  observe  the  rules  of  morality; 
were  firmly  rooted  in  the  false  law^  not  being  led 
by  the  Lord  of  the  world,  they  were  precipitated 
into  a  false  course, 

54.  Hail !  thou  art  come  at  last,  O  Light  of  the 
world!  thou,  born  to  be  bounteous  towards  all 
beings. 


1  In  the  Mahabharata  III,  156,  and  Yogayatra  I,  i,  the  sun 
is  called  'the  opened  gate  of  deliverance,'  mokshadvaram 
apavr/tam. 

2  Atarenti;  the  var.  lect.  avatarenti  isoutofplace  and  destroys 

the  metre. 

2  Preta,  properly  '  deceased,  a  deceased  one.'  The  real  meaning 
of  the  passage  is  that  men  at  night  fall  asleep. 

*  Properly,  movement,  -^arya, 

^  Gati,  going,  gait;  the  latter  is  really  meant. 

«  Asaddharme  pratish/z^ita;  the  real  meaning  may  be, 'firmly 
established  in  the  condition  of  non-existence,'  i.  e.  in  sleep. 


YII.  ANCIENT    DEVOTION.  I7I 

55.  Hail!  thou  hast  safely  arrived  at  supreme 
Buddha-knowledge ;  we  feel  thankful  before  thee, 
and  so  does  the  world,  including  the  gods. 

56.  By  thy  power,  O  mighty  Lord,  our  aerial  cars 
are  glittering ;  to  thee  we  present  them,  great 
Hero;    deign   to  accept  them,  great  Solitary. 

57.  Out  of  grace  to  us,  O  Leader,  make  use  of 
them,  so  that  we,  as  well  as  all  (other)  beings,  may 
attain  supreme  enlightenment. 

After  the  great  Brahma-angels,  O  monks,  had 
celebrated  the  Lord  Mahabhic^;2a^;Ianabhibhu,  the 
Tathagata,  &c.,  face  to  face,  with  seasonable  stanzas, 
they  besought  him  :  May  the  Lord  move  forward 
the  wheel  of  the  law!  [&c.,  as  above  till  both 
gods  and  men.] 

Thereupon,  monks,  those  fifty  hundred  thousand 
myriads  of  ko/is  of  Brahma-angels  addressed  the 
Lord,  with  one  voice,  in  common  chorus,  with  the 
following  two  stanzas: 

58.  Move  forward  the  exalted,  unsurpassed  wheel! 
beat  the  drum  of  immortality !  release  all  beings 
from  hundreds  of  evils,  and  show  the  path  of 
Nirva/^a. 

59.  Expound  the  law  we  pray  for ;  show  thy 
favour  to  us  and  this  world.  Let  us  hear  thy  sweet 
and  lovely  voice  which  thou  hast  exercised  during 
thousands  of  ko/is  of  ^ons. 

Now,  monks,  the  Lord  Mahabhi^;H^77anabhibhu, 
the  Tathagata,  &c.,  being  acquainted  with  the  prayer 
of  the  hundred  thousand  myriads  of  ko/is  of  Brahma- 
angels  and  of  the  sixteen  princes,  his  sons,  com- 
menced at  that  juncture  to  turn  the  wheel  that  has 
three  turns  and  twelve  parts,  the  wheel  never 
moved  by  any  ascetic,  Brahman,  god,  demon,  nor 


172  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  "VH. 


by  any  one  else.    (His  preaching)  consisted  in  this  : 
This  is  pain ;  this  is  the  origin  of  pain ;  this  is  the 
suppression   of  pain ;    this  is  the  treatment  leading 
to  suppression  of  pain.     He  moreover  extensively 
set  forth   how  the   series   of  causes  and    effects    is 
evolved,  (and  said) :  It  is  thus,  monks.  From  ignorance 
proceed  conceptions  (or  fancies) ;   from  conceptions 
(or  fancies)  proceeds  understanding  ^ ;   from  under- 
standing name  and  form ;  from  name  and  form  the  six 
senses 2;  from  the  six  senses  proceeds  contact;  from 
contact  sensation  ;  from  sensation  proceeds  longing  ; 
from  longing  proceeds  striving^;    from  striving  as 
cause  issues  existence ;  from  existence  birth  ;  from 
birth  old  age,  death,  mourning,  lamentation,  sorrow, 
dismay,  and  despondency.     So  originates  this  whole 
mass  of  misery.     From  the  suppression  of  ignorance 
results  the  suppression  of  conceptions;  from  the  sup- 
pression of  conceptions  results  that  of  understand- 
ing ;  from  the  suppression  of  understanding  results 
that  of  name  and   form;    from   the  suppression  of 
name  and  form  results  that  of  the  six  senses ;  from 
the    suppression    of  the  six  senses   results  that  of 
contact ;    from    the    suppression   of  contact  results 
that  of  sensation  ;  from  the  suppression  of  sensation 
results   that  of  longing;    from    the    suppression  of 
lono-ine   results    that    of  strivino- ;    from    the    sup- 
pression  of  striving  results  that  of  existence ;  from 
the  suppression  of  existence  results  that  of  birth  ; 
from  the  suppression  of  birth  results  that  of  old  age, 
death,  mourning,   lamentation,   sorrow,  dismay,  and 


^  Or,  distinctive  knowledge,  judgment. 

2  And,  the  objects  of  the  six  senses. 

3  Upadana,  also  taking  up,  and  material. 


VII.  ANCIENT    DEVOTION.  1 73 

despondency.     In  this   manner  the  whole  mass  of 
misery  is  suppressed. 

And  while  this  wheel  of  the  law,  monks,  was 
being  moved  onward  ^  by  the  Lord  Mahabhi^?Za^?^a- 
nabhibhu,  the  Tathagata,  &c.,  in  presence  of  the 
world,  including  the  gods,  demons,  and  Brahma-angels; 
of  the  assemblage,  including  ascetics  and  Brahmans; 
then,  at  that  time,  on  that  occasion,  the  minds  of 
sixty  2  hundred  thousand  myriads  of  ko/is  of  living 
beings  were  without  effort  freed  from  imperfections 
and  became  all  possessed  of  the  triple  science,  of  the 
sixfold  transcendent  wisdom,  of  the  emancipations 
and  meditations.  In  due  course,  monks,  the  Lord 
MahabhI^;7a^;Ianabhibhu,  the  Tathagata,  &c.,  again 
gave  a  second  exposition  of  the  law ;  likewise  a 
third  and  a  fourth  exposition  ^  And  at  each  exposi- 
tion, monks,  the  minds  of  hundred  thousands  of 
myriads  of  ko/is  of  beings,  like  the  sands  of  the 
river  Ganges,  were  without  effort  freed  from  imper- 
fections. Afterwards,  monks,  the  congregation  of 
disciples  of  that  Lord  was  so  numerous  as  to  sur- 
pass all  calculation. 

Meanwhile,  monks,  the  sixteen  princes,  the  youths, 
had,  full  of  faith,  left  home  to  lead  the  vagrant  life  of 
mendicants,  and  had  all  of  them  become  novices, 
clever,  bright,  intelligent,  pious,  followers  of  the 
course  (of  duty)  under  many  hundred  thousand 
Buddhas,  and  striving   after    supreme,  perfect   en- 


^  Var.  lect.  sahapravartti  kedam  buddhakshetra^  tena  Bhagavata, 
&c.,  '  and  while  this  Buddha- field  moved  on  along  with  the  Lord,' 
or  *  while  this  B.  moved  on  with  the  Lord.' 

^  Sixty  is  the  number  of  gha/ikas,  Indian  half-hours,  making 
one  day. 

^  Cf.  the  four  vyuhas,  appearances,  divisions  of  the  Lord  Vishwu. 


A 


1 74  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  VII. 

lightenment.  These  sixteen  novices,  monks,  said 
to  the  Lord  Mahabhi^;^a^;2anabhibhu,  the  Tatha- 
gata,  &c.,  the  following :  O  Lord,  these  many  hun- 
dred thousand  myriads  of  ko/is  of  disciples  of  the 
Tathagata  have  become  very  mighty,  very  powerful, 
very  potent,  owing  to  the  Lord's  teaching  of  the 
law.  Deign,  O  Lord,  to  teach  us  also,  for  mercy's 
sake,  the  law  with  a  view  to  supreme,  perfect  en- 
lightenment, so  that  we  also  may  follow  the  teaching 
of  the  Tathagata  \  We  want,  O  Lord,  to  see  the 
knowledge  of  the  Tathagata  ;  the  Lord  can  himself 
testify  to  this,  for  thou,  O  Lord,  who  knowest  the 
disposition  of  all  beings,  also  knowest  ours. 

Then,  monks,  on  seeing  that  those  princes,  the 
youths,  had  chosen  the  vagrant  life  of  mendicants 
and  become  novices,  the  half  of  the  whole  retinue 
of  the  king  A'akravartin,  to  the  number  of  eighty 
hundred  thousand  myriads  of  ko/is  of  living  beings^, 
chose  the  vagrant  life  of  mendicants. 

Subsequently,  monks,  the  Lord  Mahabhi^;7a^;7a- 
nabhibhu,  the  Tathagata,  &c.,  viewing  the  prayer 
of  those  novices  at  the  lapse  ^  of  twenty  thousand 
^ons,  amply  and  completely  revealed  the  Dharma- 
paryaya  called  '  the  Lotus  of  the  True  Law,'  a  text  * 
of  great  extent,  serving  to  instruct  Bodhisattvas  and 
proper  for  all  Buddhas,  in  presence  of  all  the  four 
classes  of  auditors. 


^  Yad  vayam-api  Tathagatasyanujikshemahi,  which  may  also  be 
rendered,  that  we  also  may  profit  by  the  teaching,  &c. 

^  The  use  of  the  term  pra«in,  a  living  being,  an  animal,  to 
denote  lifeless  objects,  is  quite  analogous  to  that  of  C^ov  in  Greek. 

^  Or,  within  the  lapse,  atyayena. 

*  Sutranta,  a  word  formed  after  the  model  of  Siddhanta  or 
Raddhanta. 


VII.  ANCIENT    DEVOTION.  1 75 

In  course  of  time,  monks,  those  sixteen  novices 
grasped,  kept,  and  fully  penetrated  the  Lord's 
teaching. 

Subsequently,  monks,  the  Lord  Mahabhi^/7a^;7ana- 
bhibhta,  the  Tathagata,  &c.,  foretold  those  sixteen 
novices  their  future  destiny  to  supreme,  perfect  en- 
lightenment. And  while  the  Lord  Mahabhl^;^a^;1a- 
nabhibhu,  the  Tathagata,  &c.,  was  propounding  the 
Dharmaparyaya  of  the  Lotus  of  the  True  Law,  the 
disciples  as  well  as  the  sixteen  novices  were  full  of 
faith,  and  many  hundred  thousand  myriads  of  ko^is 
of  beings  acquired  perfect  certainty^ 

Thereupon,  monks,  after  propounding  the  Dhar- 
maparyaya of  the  Lotus  of  the  True  Law  during 
eight  thousand  ^ons  without  interruption,  the 
Lord  Mahabhi^/^a^wanabhibhu,  the  Tathagata,  &c., 
entered  the  monastery  to  retire  for  the  purpose  of 
meditation  ^,  and  in  that  retirement,  monks,  the 
Tathagata  continued  in  the  monastery  during  eighty- 
four  thousand  ko/is  of  yEons. 

Now,  monks,  when  the  sixteen  novices  perceived 
that  the  Lord  was  absorbed,  they  sat  down  on  the 
seats,  the  royal  thrones  which  had  been  prepared  for 
each  of  them,  and  ^  amply  expounded,  during  eighty- 
four  hundred  thousand  myriads  of  ko^is^  the  Dhar- 

^  Nirvi^ikitsaprapta;  a  van  lect.  has  vi^ikitsaprapta,  which 
means  exactly  the  reverse,  at  least  if  we  take  vi^ikitsa  in  its  usual 
acceptation. 

^  Pratisa/'7zlayana,  seclusion,  retirement  for  the  purpose  of 
meditation,  absorbing  oneself  in  meditation;  Pali  pa/isalla«a. 

^  In  one  MS.  added  in  the  margin,  '  after  rendering  homage  to 
the  Lord  M.,  the  Tathagata.' 

*  One  would  expect  eighty-four  thousand  ko/is,  the  same  number 
as  above.  Burnouf  has  in  both  cases  eighty-four  thousand  -iEons, 
and  that  would  seem  to  be  the  preferable  reading. 


1 76  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARlKA.  VII. 

maparyaya  of  the  Lotus  of  the  True  Law  to  the 
four  classes.  By  doing  this,  monks,  each  of  those 
novices,  as  Bodhisattvas  fully  developed,  instructed, 
excited,  stimulated,  edified,  confirmed  ^  in  respect  to 
supreme,  perfect  enlightenment  60  x  60  ^  hundred 
thousand  myriads  of  ko/is  of  living  beings,  equal  to 
the  sands  of  the  river  Ganges. 

Now,  monks,  at  the  lapse  of  eighty-four  thousand 
^ons  the  Lord  Mahabhi/;7a^;lanabhibhu,  the  Tatha- 
gata,  &c.,  rose  from  his  meditation,  in  possession  of 
memory  and  consciousness,  whereafter  he  went  up 
to  the  seat  of  the  law,  designed  for  him,  in  order  to 
occupy  it. 

As  soon  as  the  Lord  had  occupied  the  seat  of  the 
law,  monks,  he  cast  his  looks  over  the  whole  circle 
of  the  audience  and  addressed  the  congregation  of 
monks :  They  are  wonderfully  gifted,  monks,  they 
are  prodigiously  gifted,  these  sixteen  novices, 
wise,  servitors  to  many  hundred  thousand  myriads 
of  ko/is  of  Buddhas,  observers  of  the  course  (of 
duty),  who  have  received  Buddha-knowledge,  trans- 
mitted Buddha-knowledge,  expounded  Buddha- 
knowledge.  Honour  these  sixteen  novices,  monks, 
again  and  again ;  and  all,  be  they  devoted  to  the 
vehicle  of  the  disciples,  the  vehicle  of  the  Pra- 
tyekabuddhas,  or  the  vehicle   of  the  Bodhisattvas, 


*  Avadharitavan;  var.  lect.  avataritavan,  'brought  (them)  to, 
initiated  (them)  in.' 

^  Shash/i?«  shash/i  (var.  lect.  shash/ishash/i)  Gahganadivalikasa- 
mani  prawiko/inayuta^'atasahasrawi ;  the  second  reading  admits  of 
being  rendered,  hundred  thousands  of  myriads  of  ko/is  of  living 
beings,  equal  to  the  sands  of  60  x  60  rivers  (like  the)  Ganges. 
The  number  360  is  that  of  the  days  in  a  year,  the  five  super- 
numerary days  (avama)  not  being  taken  into  account. 


VII.  ANCIENT    DEVOTION.  1 77 

who  shall  not  reject  nor  repudiate  the  preaching  of 
these  young  men  of  good  family,  O  monks,  shall 
quickly  gain  supreme,  perfect  enlightenment,  and 
obtain  Tathag^ata-knowledee. 

In  the  sequel  also,  monks,  have  these  young  men 
of  good  family  repeatedly  revealed  this  Dharma- 
paryaya  of  the  Lotus  of  the  True  Law  under  the 
mastership  of  that  Lord.  And  the  60  x  60  hundred 
thousand  myriads  of  ko/is  of  living  beings,  equal  to 
the  sands  of  the  river  Ganges  ^  who  by  each  of  the 
sixteen  novices,  the  Bodhisattvas  Mahasattvas,  in 
the  quality  of  Bodhisattva,  had  been  roused  to  en- 
lightenment, all  those  beings  followed  the  example 
of  the  sixteen  novices  in  choosing  along  with  them 
the  vagrant  life  of  mendicants,  in  their  several  exist- 
ences; they  enjoyed  their  sight  and  heard  the 
law  from  their  mouth.  They  propitiated  forty 
ko^'is  ^  of  Buddhas,  and  some  are  doing  so  up  to 
this  day. 

I  announce  to  you,  monks,  I  declare  to  you  :  Those 
sixteen  princes,  the  youths,  who  as  novices  under 
the  mastership  of  the  Lord  were  interpreters  of  the 
law,  have  all  reached  supreme,  perfect  enlighten- 
ment, and  all  of  them  are  staying,  existing,  living 
even  now,  in  the  several  directions  of  space,  in 
different  Buddha-fields,  preaching  the  law  to  many 
hundred  thousand  myriads  of  ko/is  of  disciples  and 
Bodhisattvas,  to  wit:  In  the  east,  monks,  in  the 
world  ^  Abhirati  the  Tathagata  named  Akshobhya, 

^  Or,  as  above  in  note  2,  page  176. 

^  Var.  lect.  has  40  x  100,000  x  10,000  ko/is. 

'  Lokadhatu;  it  appears  from  this  passage  that  this  term,  though 
it  may  be  rendered  by  '  world '  or  '  universe,'  in  reality  means  what 
is  implied  by  its  etymology,  viz.  a  fixed  point  of  the  world.     It  is 
needless  to  remark  that  the  points  of  the  compass  are  meant. 
[21]  N 


1 78  SADDHARMA-PUiViJARiKA.  VII. 


the  Arhat,  &c.,  and  the  Tathagata  Meruku/a,  the 
Arhat,  &c.^  In  the  south-east,  monks,  is  the  Tatha- 
gata Si7;/haghosha,  &c.,  and  the  Tathagata  Shn- 
hadhva^a,  &c.^  In  the  south,  monks,  is  the  Tatha- 
gata named  Aka^apratishZ/^ita,  &c.,  and  the  Tatha- 
gata named  Nityaparinirvrz'ta^  &c.  In  the  south- 
west, monks,  is  the  Tathagata  named  Indradhva^a, 
&c.,  and  the  Tathagata  named  Brahmadhva^,  &c. 
In  the  west,  monks,  is  the  Tathagata  named  Ami- 
tayus  ^,  &c.,  and  the  Tathagata  named  Sarvalokadha- 
tupadravodvegapratyuttir/^a,  &c.  In  the  north-west, 
monks,  is  the  Tathagata  named  Tamalapatra-^anda- 
nagandhabhi^;Ia  ^  &c.,  and  the  Tathagata  Meru- 
kalpa,  &c.  In  the  north,  monks,  is  the  Tathagata 
named  Meghasvarapradipa^  &c.,  and  the  Tathagata 

^  I  am  at  a  loss  to  explain  by  what  trick  the  S.  E.  E.  point  is  called 
'  summit  of  the  Meru.' 

2  The  names  of  these  two  Tathagatas  mean  severally,  having 
a  lion's  voice,  and  having  a  lion  for  ensign.  '  Lion'  is  one  of  the 
constant  veiled  expressions  for  hari,  yellow,  ruddy,  Vish;m,  lion, 
&c.,  because  hari  possesses  all  these  different  meanings.  The 
Buddhas  here  intended  may  be  Agni  and  Anila  or  Antariksha 
(=vayu,  air),  both  of  them  known  by  the  name  of  hari.  Cf. 
Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  VI  (new  series),  p.  287  seq. 

^  So  have  my  MSS. ;  Nityaparinivr/ta,  '  always  extinct  or  quiet,' 
is  Yama,  Death. 

*  Identical  with  Amitabha ;  he  is  the  ruler  of  the  blessed  dead 
in  the  city  of  Bliss  (Sukhavati),  and  therefore  a  variety  of  Yama. 
His  being  placed  in  the  west  is  explainable,  because  Yama  and 
Varuwa  in  a  certain  function  coincide,  and  the  latter  otherwise 
appears  as  the  ruler  of  the  west.  The  following  worthy  with  end- 
less name,  '  Having  past  all  worldly  calamities  and  emotions,'  is 
another  designation  of  Amitayus,  i.  e.  he  whose  life  is  of  unlimited 
duration. 

^  According  to  the  Camb.  MSS. ;  the  name  '  cognizant  of  the 
scent  of  Xanthochymus  and  sandal '  denotes  the  Wind,  the  ruler 
of  the  north-west. 

®  Var.  lect.  IMeghasvaradipa ;  Burnouf  has  a  third  form,  Megha- 


VIT.  ANCIENT    DEVOTION. 


179 


named  Meghasvarara^a,  &c.  In  the  north-east, 
monks,  is  the  Tathagata  named  Sarvalokabhaya^i- 
ta/^i-Z/ambhitatvavidhva^^^sanakara^  the  Arhat,  &c., 
and,  the  sixteenth,  myself,  ^'akyamuni,  the  Tatha- 
gata, the  Arhat,  &c.,  who  have  attained  supreme, 
perfect  enhghtenment  in  the  centre  of  this  Saha- 
world  ^. 

Further,  monks,  those  beings  who  have  heard  the 
law  from  us  when  we  were  novices,  those  many 
hundred  thousand  myriads  of  ko/is  of  beings,  nume- 
rous as  the  sands  of  the  river  Ganges,  whom  we 
have  severally  initiated  in  supreme,  perfect  enlighten- 
ment, they  are  up  to  this  day  standing  on  the  stage 
of  disciples  and  matured  for  supreme,  perfect  en- 
lightenment. In  regular  turn  they  are  to  attain 
supreme,  perfect  enlightenment,  for  it  is  difficult, 
monks,  to  penetrate  the  knowledge  of  the  Tatha- 
gatas.     And  which  are  those  beings,  monks,  who, 

svara.  Dipa  or  pradipa,  torch,  candle,  light,  is  necessary,  because 
the  ruler  of  the  north  is  the  moon;  meghasvara,  sound  of  the 
clouds,  must  somehow  denote  the  sky.  Ra^an,  king,  is  king 
Soma  (identified  with  the  moon). 

^  Var.  lect.  °bhayadevaga/^/^/ra°,  and,  according  to  Burnouf,  °bhaya- 
stambhitatva°.  The  compound  contains  four  epithets  of  6'iva,  the 
ruler  of  the  north-east;  sarvalokabhaya,  the  terror  of  alj  the 
world;  a^ita,  unconquerable  (the  var.  lect.  devaga  is  probably 
devagra,  the  chief  or  supreme  of  gods);  /^ambhitatvakara,  he 
who  causes  stiffness;  vidhva/wsanakara,  the  destroyer.  A'am- 
bhita  is  the  regular  Prakrit  form  for  stambhita,  and  here,  without 
doubt,  the  original  reading. 

^  Which  seems  to  imply  that  ^akyamuni  is  both  the  ruler  of 
the  north-west  and  the  central  point.  As  a  ruler  of  the  north-west 
we  find  S'xWm  in  Bnliat  Sawhita,  chap.  53,  51  ;  in  Buddhist  writings 
6'ikhin  is  synonymous  with  Brahma  Sahampati.  So  it  would  seem 
as  if  6'akyamuni  in  this  passage  were  considered  to  be  one  with 
Brahma. 

N  2 


1 80  SADDHARMA-PUA^DARIKA.  VII. 

innumerable,  incalculable  like  the  sands  of  the 
Ganges,  those  hundred  thousands  of  myriads  of 
ko/is  of  living  beings,  whom  I,  when  I  was  a  Bodhi- 
sattva  under  the  mastership  of  that  Lord,  have 
taught  the  law  of  omniscience  ?  Yourselves,  monks, 
were  at  that  time  those  beings. 

And  those  who  shall  be  my  disciples  in  future, 
when  I  shall  have  attained  complete  Nirva;za,  shall 
learn  the  course  (of  duty)  of  Bodhisattvas,  without 
conceiviiig  the  idea  of  their  being  Bodhisattvas. 
And,  monks,  all  who  shall  have  the  idea  of  complete 
Nirva;2a,  shall  reach  it.  It  should  be  added,  monks, 
as^  I  stay  under  different  names  in  other  worlds, 
they  shall  there  be  born  again  seeking  after  the 
knowledge  of  the  Tathagatas,  and  there  they  shall 
anew  hear  this  dogma  :  The  complete  Nirva;^a  of 
the  Tathagatas  is  but  one ;  there  is  no  other,  no 
second  Nirva;^a  of  the  Tathagatas.  Herein,  monks, 
one  has  to  see  a  device  of  the  Tathag-atas  and  a 
direction^  for  the  preaching  of  the  law.  When  the 
Tathagata,  monks,  knows  that  the  moment  of  his 
complete  extinction  has  arrived,  and  sees  that  the 
assemblage  is  pure,  strong  in  faith,  penetrated  with 
the  law  of  voidness,  devoted  to  meditation,  devoted 
to  great  meditation,  then,  monks,  the  Tathagata, 
because  the  time  has  arrived,  calls  together  all  Bodhi- 
sattvas and  all  disciples  to  teach  them  thus  :  There 


^  Or,  perhaps,  when ;  api  tu  khalu  punar,  bhikshavo,  yad  aham 
anyasu  lokadhatushu  anyonyair  (to  r.  anyanyair?)  namadheyair 
viharami ;  in  one  MS.  a  correcting  hand  has  written  in  the  margin 
vihareya»i. 

*  Abhinirhara;  I  am  not  sure  of  the  correctness  of  this 
rendering;  in  Pali  abhinihara  is  interpreted  to  be  'earnest  wish 
or  aspiration;'  abhiniharati,  to  turn,  direct. 


VII.  ANCIENT    DEVOTION.  l8l 

is,  O  monks,  in  this  world  no  second  vehicle  at  all, 
no  second  NlrvAua.,  far  less  a  third.  It  is  an  able 
device  of  the  Tathagata,  monks,  that  on  seeing 
creatures^  far  advanced  on  the  path  of  perdition, 
delighting  in  the  low  and  plunged  in  the  mud  of 
sensual  desires,  the  Tathagata  teaches  them  that 
Nirva;/a  to  which  they  are  attached. 

By  way  of  example,  monks,  suppose  there  is  some 
dense  forest  five  hundred  yo^anas  in  extent  which 
has  been  reached  by  a  great  company  of  men.  They 
have  a  guide  to  lead  them  on  their  journey  to  the  Isle 
of  Jewels,  which  guide,  being  able,  clever,  sagacious, 
well  acquainted  with  the  difficult  passages  of  the 
forest,  is  to  bring  the  whole  company^  out  of  the 
forest.  Meanwhile  that  great  troop  of  men,  tired, 
weary,  afraid,  and  anxious,  say:  'Verily,  Master,  guide, 
and  leader,  know  that  we  are  tired,  weary,  afraid,  and 
anxious ;  let  us  return ;  this  dense  forest  stretches 
so  far.'  The  guide,  who  is  a  man  of  able  devices, 
on  seeing  those  people  desirous  of  returning,  thinks 
within  himself:  It  ought  not  to  be  that  these  poor 
creatures  should  not  reach  that  great  Isle  of  Jewels. 
Therefore  out  of  pity  for  them  he  makes  use  of  an 
artifice.  In  the  middle  of  that  forest  he  produces 
a  magic  city  more  than  a  hundred  or  two  hundred 
yo^anas  in  extent.  Thereafter  he  says  to  those 
men :  '  Be  not  afraid,  sirs,  do  not  return  ;  there  you 
see  a  populous  place  where  you  may  take  repose 
and  perform  all  you  have  to  do ;  there  stay  in 
the  enjoyment  of  happy  rest^     Let  him  who  after 

^  Satvan,  var.  lect.  satvadhatu;;/;    Burnouf  has  Ma  reunion 
des  etres.' 

^  Sartha,  usually  a  company  of  merchants,  a  caravan. 
^  And,  of  Nirvawa,  nirvawaprapta  viharadhvam. 


1 82  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  VII. 

reposing  there  wants  to  do  so,  proceed  to  the  great 
Isle  of  Jewels.' 

Then,  monks,  the  men  who  are  in  the  forest  are 
struck  with  astonishment,  and  think :  We  are  out  of 
the  forest ;  we  have  reached  the  place  of  happy  rest ; 
let  us  stay  here.  They  enter  that  magic  city,  in  the 
meaning  that  they  have  arrived  at  the  place  of  their 
destination,  that  they  are  saved  and  in  the  enjoy- 
ment of  rest.  They  think :  We  are  at  rest,  we  are 
refreshed  ^  After  a  while,  when  the  guide  perceives 
that  their  fatigue  is  gone,  he  causes  the  magic 
city  to  disappear,  and  says  to  them  :  '  Come,  sirs, 
there  you  see  the  great  Isle  of  Jewels  quite  near; 
as  to  this  great  city,  it  has  been  produced  by  me  for 
no  other  purpose  but  to  give  you  some  repose.' 

In  the  same  manner,  monks,  is  the  Tathagata,  the 
Arhat,  &c. ,  your  guide,  and  the  guide  of  all  other  beings. 
Indeed,  monks,  the  Tathagata,  &c.,  reflects  thus  : 
Great  is  this  forest  of  evils  which  must  be  crossed, 
left,  shunned.  It  ought  not  to  be  that  these  beings, 
after  hearing  the  Buddha-knowledge,  should  suddenly 
turn  back  and  not  proceed  to  the  end  because  they 
think :  This  Buddha-knowledge  is  attended  with  too 
many  difficulties  to  be  gone  through  to  the  end. 
Under  those  circumstances  the  Tathagata,  knowing 
the  creatures  to  be  feeble  of  character,  (does)  as  the 
guide  (who)  produces  the  magic  city  in  order  that 
those  people  may  have  repose,  and  after  their  having 
taken  repose,  he  tells  them  that  the  city  is  one  pro- 
duced by  magic.  In  the  same  manner,  monks,  the 
Tathagata,  &c.,  to  give  a  repose  to  the  creatures, 
very  skilfully  teaches  and  proclaims  two  stages  of 

»  ^itibhuta. 


VII.  ANCIENT    DEVOTION.  1 8 


J 


Nirva/^a,  viz.  the  stage  of  the  disciples  and  that  of 
the  Pratyekabuddhas.  And,  monks,  when  the  crea- 
tures are  there  halting,  then  the  Tathagata,  &c., 
himself,  pronounces  these  words :  '  You  have  not 
accomplished  your  task,  monks  ;  you  have  not 
finished  what  you  had  to  do.  But  behold,  monks  ! 
the  Buddha-knowledge  is  near ;  behold  and  be 
convinced  ^ :  what  to  you  (seems)  Nirvana,  that  is 
not  Nirva7^a.  Nay,  monks,  it  is  an  able  device 
of  the  Tathagatas,  &c.,  that  they  expound  three 
vehicles.' 

And  in  order  to  explain  this  same  subject  more 
in  detail,  the  Lord  on  that  occasion  uttered  the  fol- 
lowing stanzas  : 

60.  The  Leader  of  the  world,  Abhi^;/a^;'^ana- 
bhibhu,  having  occupied  the  terrace  of  enlighten- 
ment, continued  ten  complete  intermediate  kalpas 
without  gaining  enlightenment,  though  he  saw  the 
things  in  their  very  essence. 

61.  Then  the  gods,  Nagas,  demons,  and  goblins, 
zealous  to  honour  the  6^ina,  sent  down  a  rain  of 
flowers  on  the  spot  where  the  Leader  awakened  to 
enlightenment. 

62.  And  high  in  the  sky  they  beat  the  cymbals 
to  worship  and  honour  the  6^ina,  and  they  were 
vexed  that  the  Gina,  delayed  so  long  in  coming  to 
the  highest  place. 

63.  After  the  lapse  of  ten  intermediate  kalpas 
the  Lord  Anabhibhu^  attained  enlightenment;  then 

^  Vyava^arayadhvam;  I  have  not  met  this  word  elsewhere, 
and  am  not  certain  of  its  precise  meaning ;  Burnouf  renders  it  by 
'rdfldchissez-y.' 

2  I.  e.  '  he  who  has  no  one  surpassing  him  ; '  it  is  virtually  the 
same  with  Abhibhu. 


184  SADDHARMA-PUA^DARIKA.  YII, 

all  gods,  men,  serpents,  and  demons  were  glad  and 
overjoyed. 

64.  The  sixteen  sons  of  the  Leader  of  men,  those 
heroes,  being  at  the  time  young  princes,  rich  in 
virtues,  came  along  with  thousands  of  ko^is  of  living 
beines  to  honour  the  eminent  chiefs  of  men. 

65.  And  after  saluting  the  feet  of  the  Leader  they 
prayed :  Reveal  the  law  and  refresh  us  as  well  as 
this  world  with  thy  good  word,  O  Lion  amongst 
kings. 

66.  After  a  long  time  thou  art  seen  (again)  in  the 
ten  points  of  this  world ;  thou  appearest,  great 
Leader,  while  the  aerial  cars  of  the  Brahma-angels 
are  stirring  to  reveal  a  token  to  living  beings. 

67.  In  the  eastern  quarter  fifty  thousand  ko/is  of 
fields  have  been  shaken,  and  the  loftv  angelic  cars^ 
in  them  have  become  excessively  brilliant. 

68.  The  Brahma-angels  on  perceiving  this  fore- 
token went  and  approached  the  Chief  of  the  Leaders 
of  the  world,  and,  covering  him  with  flowers,  pre- 
sented all  of  them  their  cars  to  him. 

69.  They  prayed  him  to  move  forward  the  wheel 
of  the  law,  and  celebrated  him  with  stanzas  and 
songs.  But  the  king  of  kings  was  silent,  (for  he 
thought):  The  time  has  not  yet  arrived  for  me  to 
proclaim  the  law. 

70.  Likewise  in  the  south,  west,  north,  the  nadir, 
zenith,  and  in  the  intermediate  points  of  the  compass 
there  were  thousands  of  ko/is  of  Brahma-angels. 

71.  Unremittingly  covering  the  Lord  (with  flowers) 
they  saluted  the  feet  of  the  Leader,  presented  all 
their  aerial  cars,  celebrated  him,  and  again  prayed : 

^  Literally,  Brahma-cars. 


YII.  ANCIENT    DEVOTION.  1 85 

72.  Move  forward  the  wheel,  O  thou  whose  sight 
is  infinite !  Rarely  art  thou  met  in  (the  course  of) 
many  ko/is  of  ^ons.  Display  the  benevolence  thou 
hast  observed  in  so  many  former  generations^ ;  open 
the  gate  of  immortality. 

73.  On  hearing  their  prayer,  he  whose  sight  is 
infinite  exposed  the  multifarious  law  and  the  four 
Truths,  extensively.  All  existences  (said  he)  spring 
successively  from  their  antecedents. 

74.  Starting  from  Ignorance,  the  Seer  proceeded 
to  speak  of  death,  endless  woe-;  all  those  evils 
spring  from  birth.  Know  likewise  that  death  is 
the  lot  of  mankind^. 

75.  No  sooner  had  he  expounded  the  multifarious, 
different,  endless  laws,  than  eighty  myriads  of  ko^is 
of  creatures  who  had  heard  them  quickly  attained 
the  stage  of  disciples. 

76.  On  a  second  occasion^  the  6^ina  expounded 
many  laws,  and  beings  like  the  sands  of  the  Ganges 
became  instantly  purified  and  disciples. 

'^'].  From  that  moment  the  assembly  of  that 
Leader  of  the  world  was  innumerable ;  no  man 
would  be  able  to  reach  the  term  (of  its  number), 
even  were  he  to  go  on  counting  for  myriads  of  ko/is 
of  y^ons. 

78.  Those  sixteen  princes  also,  his  own  dear  sons, 

^  Maitrim  bahupurvasevitam. 

2  MSS.  prabhashate  mara/zam  anantaw.  du/^kham  ;  Burnouf  has 
'  parle  de  la  mort  dont  la  douleur  est  sans  fin.' 

^  The  translation  is  uncertain ;  mrztyuw  kz.  manushyam  imeva 
^anatha.  I  take  imeva,  like  emeva  in  other  passages  (e.g.  in  st. 
103),  for  the  heme va(Sansk.  evam  eva)  of  the  Aj-oka  inscriptions. 
One  might  also  render :  '  Know  that  death  (mortality)  and  humanity 
(human  lot)  are  one  and  the  same.' 

*  Or,  at  a  second  moment,  ksha?;e. 


1 86  SADDHARMA-PUJVDARIKA.  VII. 

who  had  become  mendicants^  and  novices,  said  to 
the  6^ina :  '  Expound,  O  Chief,  the  superior  law ; 

79.  '  That  we  may  become  sages,  knowers  of  the 
world,  such  as  thyself  art,  O  supreme  of  all  Gma.s, 
and  that  all  these  beings  may  become  such  as  thyself 
art,  O  hero,  O  clear-sighted  one^.' 

80.  And  the  6^ina,  considering  the  wish  of  his 
sons,  the  young  princes,  explained  the  highest 
superior  enlightenment  by  means  of  many  myriads 
of  ko/is  of  illustrations. 

81.  Demonstrating  with  thousands  of  arguments 
and  elucidating  the  knowledge  of  transcendent  wis- 
dom, the  Lord  of  the  world  indicated  the  veritable 
course  (of  duty)  such  as  was  followed  by  the  wise 
Bodhisattvas. 

82.  This  very  Sutra  of  great  extension,  this  good 
Lotus  of  the  True  Law,  was  by  the  Lord  delivered  in 
many  thousands  of  stanzas,  so  numerous  as  to  equal 
the  sands  of  the  Ganges. 

83.  After  delivering  this  S^tra,  the  G'ma.  entered 
the  monastery  for  the  purpose  of  becoming  absorbed^ 
in  meditation  ;  during  eighty-four  complete  ^ons 
the  Lord  of  the  world  continued  meditating,  sitting 
on  the  same  seat. 

84.  Those  novices,  perceiving  that  the  Chief  re- 
mained in  the  monastery  without  coming  out  of  it, 
imparted  to  many  ko/is  of  creatures  that  Buddha- 


^  -S'ellakabhuta,  van  lect.  >^elukabh.  and  /^ailakabhuta.  The 
Aailaka  'is  he  who  contents  himself  with  such  a  portion  of  clothes 
as  barely  suffices  to  cover  his  nakedness,  rejecting  everything  more 
as  superfluous.'     Hodgson  Essays,  p.  52,  cf.  pp.  30  and  64. 

^  Or,  according  to  the  reading  followed  by  Burnouf,  'clear- 
sighted as  thyself,  O  hero.' 

^  Vilakshayiti. 


VII.  ANCIENT    DEVOTION.  1 87 

knowledge,  which    is    free    from   imperfections  and 
bhssful. 

85.  On  the  seats  which  they  had  made  to  be  pre- 
pared, one  for  each,  they  expounded  this  very  Sutra 
under  the  mastership  of  the  Sugata  of  that  period. 
A  service  of  the  same  kind  they  render  to  me\ 

86.  Innumerable  as  the  sands  of  sixty  thousand 
(rivers  like  the)  Ganges  were  the  beings  then  taught ; 
each  of  the  sons  of  the  Sugata  converted  (or  trained) 
endless  beings. 

87.  After  the  6^ina's  complete  Nirva;m  they  com- 
menced a  wandering  life  and  saw  ko/is  of  Buddhas  ; 
along  with  those  pupils  they  rendered  homage  to 
the  most  exalted  amongst  men. 

88.  Havinof  observed  the  extensive  and  sublime 
course  of  duty  and  reached  enlightenment  in  the 
ten  points  of  space,  those  sixteen  sons  of  the  6^ina 
became  themselves  (Spinas,  two  by  two,  in  each  point 
of  the  horizon. 

89.  And  all  those  who  had  been  their  pupils  be- 
came disciples  of  those  6^inas,  and  gradually  obtained 
possession  of  enlightenment  by  various  means. 

90.  I  myself  was  one  of  their  number,  and  you 
have  all  been  taught  by  me.  Therefore  you  are  my 
disciples  now  also,  and  I  lead  you  all  to  enlighten- 
ment by  (my)  devices. 

91.  This  is  the  cause  dating  from  old,  this  is  the 
motive  of  my  expounding  the  law,  that  I  lead  you  to 
superior  enlightenment.  This  being  the  case,  monks, 
you  need  not  be  afraid. 

92.  It  is  as  if  there  were  a  forest  dreadful,  terrific, 
barren,  without  a  place  of  refuge  or  shelter,  replete 

^  Adhikaru  kurvanti  mamaivarupaw. 


1 88  SADDHARMA-PUiV^DARIKA.  VII. 

with  wild   beasts,   deprived   of  water,  frightful   for 
persons  of  no  experience. 

93.  (Suppose  further  that)  many  thousand  men 
have  come  to  the  forest,  that  waste  track  of  wilder- 
ness which  is  fully  five  hundred  yo^anas  in  extent. 

94.  And  he  who  is  to  act  as  their  guide  through 
that  rough  and  horrible  forest  is  a  rich  man, 
thoughtful,  intelligent,  wise,  well  instructed,  and  un- 
daunted. 

95.  And  those  beings,  numbering  many  ko/is,  feel 
tired,  and  say  to  the  guide :  '  We  are  tired.  Master ; 
we  are  not  able  to  go  on ;  we  should  like  now  to 
return.' 

96.  But  he,  the  dexterous  and  clever  guide,  is 
searching  in  his  mind  for  some  apt  device,  Alas ! 
he  thinks,  by  going  back  these  foolish  men  will  be 
deprived  of  the  possession  of  the  jewels. 

97.  Therefore  let  me  by  dint  of  magic  power  now 
produce  a  great  city  adorned  with  thousands  of  ko/is 
of  buildings  and  embellished  by  monasteries  and 
parks. 

98.  Let  me  produce  ponds  and  canals ;  (a  city) 
adorned  with  gardens  and  flowers,  provided  with 
walls  and  gates,  and  inhabited  by  an  infinite  number 
of  men  and  women. 

99.  After  creating  that  city  he  speaks  to  them  in 
this  manner :  '  Do  not  fear,  and  be  cheerful ;  you 
have  reached  a  most  excellent  city ;  enter  it  and  do 
your  business,  speedily. 

100.  'Be  joyful  and  at  ease;  you  have  reached 
the  limit  of  the  whole  forest.'  It  is  to  give  them 
a  time  for  repose  that  he  speaks  these  words,  and,  in 
fact,  they  recover  from  their  weariness. 

loi.  As  he  perceives  that  they  have  sufficiently 


VII.  ANCIENT    DEVOTION.  1 89 

reposed,  he  collects  them  and  addresses  them  again : 
'  Come,  hear  what  I  have  to  tell  you  :  this  city  have 
I  produced  by  magic. 

102.  '  On  seeing  you  fatigued,  I  have,  lest  you 
should  go  back,  made  use  of  this  device  ;  now  strain 
your  energy  to  reach  the  Isle.' 

103.  In  the  same  manner,  monks,  I  am  the  guide, 
the  conductor  of  thousands  of  ko/is  of  living  beings  ; 
in  the  same  manner  I  see  creatures  toiling  and  un- 
able to  break  the  shell  of  the  egg  of  evils  \ 

104.  Then  I  reflect  on  this  matter :  These  beings 
have  enjoyed  repose,  have  been  tranquillised ;  now 
I  will  remind^  them  of  the  misery  of  all  things  (and 
I  say) :  '  At  the  stage  of  Arhat  you  shall  reach  your 
aim.' 

105.  At  that  time,  when  you  shall  have  attained 
that  state,  and  when  I  see  all  of  you  have  become 
Arhats,  then  will  I  call  you  all  together  and  explain 
to  you  how  the  law  really  is. 

106.  It  is  an  artifice  of  the  Leaders,  when  they, 
the  great  Seers,  show  three  vehicles,  for  there  is 
but  one  vehicle,  no  second ;  it  is  only  to  help  (crea- 
tures) that  two  vehicles  are  spoken  of. 

107.  Therefore  I  now  tell  you,  monks  :  Rouse  to 
the  utmost  your  lofty  energy  for  the  sake  of  the 
knowledge  of  the  all-knowing ;  as  yet,  you  have  not 
come  so  far  as  to  possess  complete  Nirva/^a. 

108.  But  when  you  shall  have  attained  the  know- 
ledge of  the  all-knowing  and  the  ten  powers  proper 
to    6^inas,   you   shall   become   Buddhas   marked  by 


^  Klejaw^fakoja. 

^  The  rendering  of  this  passage  is  doubtful ;  the  text  runs  thus : 
sarvasya  du/^khasya  'nubodha  eshu. 


IQO  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  YLJ. 


the    thirty-two    characteristic   signs    and    have    rest 
for  ever. 

109.  Such  is  the  teaching  of  the  Leaders  :  in  order 
to  give  quiet  they  speak  of  repose,  (but)  when  they 
see  that  (the  creatures)  have  had  a  repose,  they, 
knowing  this  to  be  no  final  resting-place,  initiate 
them  in  the  knowledge  of  the  all-knowing. 


VIII.        DESTINY    OF    THE    FIVE    HUNDRED    MONKS.       I9I 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

ANNOUNCEMENT    OF    THE    FUTURE    DESTINY    OF    THE 
FIVE    HUNDRED    MONKS. 

On  hearing  from  the  Lord  that  display  of  skilful- 
ness  and  the  instruction  by  means  of  mysterious 
speech ;  on  hearing  the  announcement  of  the  future 
destiny  of  the  great  Disciples,  as  well  as  the  fore- 
going tale  concerning  ancient  devotion  and  the 
leadership^  of  the  Lord,  the  venerable  Pur;^a,  son  of 
Maitraya?^i,  was  filled  with  wonder  and  amazement, 
thrilled^  with  pure-heartedness^,  a  feeling  of  delight 
and  joy.  He  rose  from  his  seat,  full  of  delight  and 
joy,  full  of  great  respect  for  the  law,  and  while  pros- 
trating himself  before  the  Lord's  feet,  made  within 
himself  the  following  reflection  :  Wonderful,  O  Lord  ; 
wonderful,  O  Sugata ;  it  is  an  extremely  difficult 
thing  that  the  Tathagatas,  &c.,  perform,  the  con- 
forming to  this  world,  composed  of  so  many  elements, 
and  preaching  the  law  to  all  creatures  with  many 
proofs  of  their  skilfulness,  and  skilfully  releasing 
them  when  attached  to  this  or  that.    What  could  we 

^  Vr/shabhitva,  a  curious  and  irregular  form  instead  of 
vrz'shabhatva. 

2  Sphu/a,  in  the  sense  of  vyapta;  Pali  phu/a. 

3  Niramisha/('ittena.  Niramisha  is  both  'free  from  worldly 
taint,  sensual  desire/  and  'without  having  a  lure,  not  eager  for 
reward,'  i.e.  disinterested.  Both  meanings  are  so  intimately  con- 
nected that  it  is  not  always  easy  to  decide  which  we  should  prefer, 
e.g.  Lalita-vistara,  p.  215,  and  Manu  VI,  49. 


192  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  YIII. 

do,  O  Lord,  in  such  a  case  ?  None  but  the  Tatha- 
gata  knows  our  incHnation  and  our  ancient  course. 
Then,  after  sakiting  with  his  head  the  Lord's  feet, 
Pur;za  went  and  stood  apart,  gazing  up  to  the 
Lord  with  unmoved  eyes  and  so  showing  his 
veneration. 

And  the  Lord,  regarding  the  mental  disposition  of 
the  venerable  Pur;^a,  son  of  Maitraya?^!,  addressed 
the  entire  assembly  of  monks  in  this  strain :  Ye 
monks,  see^  this  disciple,  Ptar;^a,  son  of  Maitra- 
y3.ni,  whom  I  have  designated  as  the  foremost  of 
preachers  in  this  assembly,  praised  for  his  many 
virtues,  and  who  has  applied  himself  in  various 
ways  to  comprehend  the  true  law.  He  is  the  man 
to  excite,  arouse,  and  stimulate  the  four  classes  of 
the  audience ;  unwearied  in  the  preaching  of  the 
law ;  as  capable  to  preach  the  law  as  to  oblige  his 
fellow-followers  of  the  course  of  duty.  The  Tatha- 
gata  excepted,  monks,  there  is  none  able  to  equal 
P{ir/2a,  son  of  Maitraya^^i,  either  essentially  or  in 
accessories.  Now,  monks,  do  you  suppose  that  he 
keeps  my  true  law  only  ?  No,  monks,  you  must  not 
think  so.  For  I  remember,  monks,  that  in  the  past, 
in  the  times  of  the  ninety-nine  Buddhas,  the  same 
FUrua,  kept  the  true  law  under  the  mastership  of 
those  Buddhas.  Even  as  he  is  now  with  me,  so  he 
has,  in  all  periods,  been  the  foremost  of  the  preachers 
of  the  law ;  has  in  all  periods  been  a  consummate 
knower  of  Voidness  ;  has  in  all  periods  acquired  the 
(four)  distinctive  qualifications  of  an  Arhat^;  has  in 
all  periods  reached  mastership  in  the  transcendent 

^  Pa^-yata,  var.  lect.  pa^yadhvam. 

"^  Pratisawvid,  in  meaning  answering  to  Pali  pa/isambhida. 


VIII.       DESTINY    OF    THE    FIVE    HUNDRED    MONKS.         1 93 

wisdom  of  the  Bodhisattvas.  He  has  been  a 
strongly  convinced^  preacher  of  the  law,  exempt 
from  doubt,  and  quite  pure.  Under  the  mastership 
of  those  Buddhas  he  has  during  his  whole  exist- 
ence observed  a  spiritual  life,  and  everywhere  they 
termed  him  '  the  Disciple.'  By  this  means  he  has 
promoted  the  interest  of  innumerable,  incalculable 
hundred  thousands  of  myriads  of  ko/is  of  beings, 
and  brought  innumerable  and  incalculable  beings  to 
full  ripeness  for  supreme  and  perfect  enlightenment. 
In  all  periods  he  has  assisted  the  creatures  in  the  func- 
tion of  a  Buddha,  and  in  all  periods  he  has  purified 
his  own  Buddha-field,  always  striving  to  bring  crea- 
tures to  ripeness.  He  was  also,  monks,  the  fore- 
most among  the  preachers  of  the  law  under  the 
seven  Tathagatas,  the  first  of  whom  is  Vipai-yin  and 
the  seventh  myself^. 

And  as  to  the  Buddhas,  monks,  who  have  in 
future  to  appear  in  this  Bhadra-kalpa,  to  the  number 
of  a  thousand  less  four,  under  the  mastership  of 
them  also  shall  this  same  Pur;^a,  son  of  Maitraya//i, 
be  the  foremost  among  the  preachers  of  the  law 
and  the  keeper  of  the  true  law.  Thus  he  shall  keep 
the  true  law  of  innumerable  and  incalculable  Lords 
and  Buddhas  in  future,  promote  the  interest  of  innu- 
merable and  incalculable  beings,  and  bring  innumer- 
able and  incalculable  beings  to  full  ripeness  for 
supreme  and  perfect  enlightenment.  Constantly 
and  assiduously  he  shall  be  instant  in  purifying  his 
own  Buddha-field  and  bringing  creatures  to  ripeness. 


^  Suvinii-^ita. 

2  The  seven  so-called  Manushi-Buddhas ;  a  rather  transparent 
disguise  of  the  fact  that  in  cosmological  mythology  there  are  seven 
Manus,  rulers  of  certain  periods. 

[21]  O 


194  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  VIII. 

After  completing  such  a  Bodhisattva-course,  at  the 
end  of  innumerable,  incalculable  ^ons,  he  shall 
reach  supreme  and  perfect  enlightenment;  he  shall  in 
the  world  be  the  Tathagata  called  Dharmaprabhasa, 
an  Arhat,  &c.,  endowed  with  science  and  conduct, 
a  Sugata,  &c.  He  shall  appear  in  this  very  Buddha- 
field. 

Further,  monks,  at  that  time  the  Buddha-field 
spoken  of  will  look  as  if  formed  by  thousands  of 
spheres  similar  to  the  sands  of  the  river  Ganges.  It 
will  be  even,  like  the  palm  of  the  hand,  consist  of  seven 
precious  substances,  be  without  hills,  and  filled  with 
high  edifices  of  seven  precious  substances^.  There 
will  be  cars  of  the  gods  stationed  in  the  sky ;  the 
gods  will  behold  men,  and  men  will  behold  the  gods. 
Moreover,  monks,  at  that  time  that  Buddha-field 
shall  be  exempt  from  places  of  punishment  and  from 
womankind,  as  all  beings  shall  be  born  by  appari- 
tional  birth.  They  shall  lead  a  spiritual  life,  have 
ideal  ^  bodies,  be  self-lighting,  magical,  moving  in 
the  firmament,  strenuous,  of  good  memory,  wise, 
possessed  of  gold-coloured  bodies,  and  adorned  with 
the  thirty-two  characteristics  of  a  great  man.  And 
at  that  time,  monks,  the  beings  in  that  Buddha-field 
will  have  two  things  to  feed  upon,  viz.  the  delight  in 
the  law  and  the  delight  in  meditation.     There  will 


^  The  Buddha-field  of  Purwa,  i.e.  full,  is  so  extremely  pure,  because 
he  is,  I  suppose,  the  full  moon.  He  is  called  the  son  of  Maitra- 
ya;/i,  because  the  full  moon  is  born  on  the  15th  day  of  the  month. 
Maitrayawi  is  a  slightly  disguised  Maitri,  otherwise  called  Anuradha, 
the  15th  asterism,  in  the  ancient  series.  Hence  we  may  infer  that 
the  story  of  Pur«a  is  comparatively  old.  No  wonder  that  Pur«a 
is  surpassed  by  none,  the  Buddha  excepted. 

"^  Manomaya. 


VIII.       DESTINY    OF    THE    FIVE    HUNDRED    MONKS.         1 95 


be  an  immense,  incalculable  number  of  hundred 
thousands  of  myriads  of  ko/is  of  Bodhisattvas ;  all 
endowed  with  great  transcendent  wisdom,  accom- 
plished in  the  (four)  distinctive  qualifications  of  an 
Arhat,  able  in  instructing  creatures.  He  (that 
Buddha)  will  have  a  number  of  disciples,  beyond 
all  calculation,  mighty  in  magic,  powerful,  masters  in 
the  meditation  of  the  eight  emancipations.  So 
immense  are  the  good  qualities  that  Buddha-field 
will  be  possessed  of.  And  that  ^on  shall  be  called 
Ratnavabhasa  (i.  e.  radiant  with  gems),  and  that 
world  Suvii-uddha  (i.e.  very  pure).  His  lifetime 
shall  last  immense,  incalculable  yEons ;  and  after 
the  complete  extinction  of  that  Lord  Dharmapra- 
bhasa,  the  Tathagata,  &c.,  his  true  law  shall  last 
long,  and  his  world  shall  be  full  of  Stupas  made 
of  precious  substances.  Such  inconceivable  good 
qualities,  monks,  shall  the  Buddha-field  of  that  Lord 
be  possessed  of. 

So  spoke  the  Lord,  and  thereafter  he,  the  Sugata, 
the  Master,  added  the  following  stanzas : 

1.  Listen  to  me,  monks,  and  hear  how  my  son 
has  achieved  his  course  of  duty,  and  how  he,  well- 
trained  and  skilful,  has  observed  the  course  of 
enlightenment. 

2.  Viewing  these  beings  to  be  lowly-disposed  and 
to  be  startled  at  the  lofty  vehicle,  the  Bodhisattvas 
become  disciples  and  exercise  Pratyekabuddhaship. 

3.  By  many  hundreds  of  able  devices  they  bring 
numerous  Bodhisattvas  to  full  ripeness  and  declare  : 
We  are  but  disciples,  indeed,  and  we  are  far  away 
from  the  highest  and  supreme  enlightenment. 

4.  It  is  by  learning  from  them  this  course  (of 
duty)   that  ko/is    of  beings  arrive  at  full  ripeness, 

o  2 


196  SADDHARMA-PUA^DARtlvA.  VIII. 

who  (at  first),  lowly-disposed  and  somewhat  lazy,  in 
course  of  time  all  become  Buddhas. 

5.  They  follow  a  course  in  ignorance  (thinking) : 
We,  disciples,  are  of  little  use,  indeed!  In  de- 
spondency they  descend  into  all  places  of  existence 
(successively),  and  (so)  clear  their  own  field. 

6.  They  show  in  their  own  persons  that  they  are 
not  free  from  affection,  hatred,  and  infatuation  ;  and 
on  perceiving  (other)  beings  clinging  to  (heretical) 
views  ^  they  go  so  far  as  to  accommodate  themselves 
to  those  views. 

7.  By  following  such  a  course  my  numerous  dis- 
ciples skilfully  save  creatures ;  simple  people  would 
go  mad,  if  they  were  taught  the  whole  course  of  life 
(or  story). 

8.  Plar;^a  here,  monks,  my  disciple,  has  formerly- 
fulfilled  his  course  (of  duty)  under  thousands  of 
ko/is  of  Buddhas,  he  has  got  possession  of  this  true 
law  by  seeking  after  Buddha-knowledge. 

9.  And  at  all  periods  has  he  been  the  foremost 
of  the  disciples,  learned,  a  brilliant  orator,  free  from 
hesitation ;  he  has,  indeed,  always  been  able  to 
excite  to  gladness  and  at  all  times  ready  to  perform 
the  Buddha-task. 

10.  He  has  always  been  accomplished  in  the  sub- 
lime transcendent  faculties  and  endowed  with  the 
distinctive  qualifications  of  an  Arhat ;  he  knew  the 
faculties  and  range  of  (other)  beings,  and  has  always 
preached  the  perfectly  pure  law. 

11.  By  exposing  the  most  eminent  of  true  laws 
he  has  brought  thousands  of  ko/is  of  beings  to  full 
ripeness  for  this  supreme,  foremost  vehicle,  whilst 
purifying  his  own  excellent  field. 

^  Dr/sh/ivilagna. 


VIII.       DESTINY    OF    THE    FIVE    HUNDRED    MONKS.       1 97 

12.  In  future  also  he  shall  likewise  honour  thou- 
sands of  ko/is  of  Buddhas,  acquire  knowledge  of  the 
most  eminent  of  good  laws,  and  clean  his  own  field. 

13.  Always  free  from  timidity  he  shall  preach  the 
law  with  thousands  of  ko^is  of  able  devices,  and 
bring  many  beings  to  full  ripeness  for  the  knowledge 
of  the  all-knowing  that  is  free  from  imperfections. 

14.  After  having  paid  homage  to  the  Chiefs  of 
men  and  always  kept  the  most  eminent  of  laws,  he 
shall  in  the  world  be  a  Buddha  self-born,  widely 
renowned  everywhere  by  the  name  of  Dharma- 
prabhasa. 

15.  And  his  field  shall  always  be  very  pure  and 
always  set  off  with  seven  precious  substances ;  his 
^on  shall  be  (called)  Ratnavabhasa,  and  his  world 
Suvii^uddha. 

16.  That  world  shall  be  pervaded  with  many 
thousand  ko/Is  of  Bodhisattvas,  accomplished  mas- 
ters in  the  great  transcendent  sciences,  pure  in  every 
respect,  and  endowed  with  magical  power. 

17.  At  that  period  the  Chief  shall  also  have  an 
assemblage  of  thousands  of  ko^is  of  disciples,  en- 
dowed with  magical  power,  adepts  at  the  meditation 
of  the  (eight)  emancipations,  and  accomplished  in 
the  (four)  distinctive  qualifications  of  an  Arhat. 

18.  And  all  beinQs  in  that  Buddha-field  shall  be 
pure  and  lead  a  spiritual  life.  Springing  into  exist- 
ence by  apparitional  birth,  they  shall  all  be  gold- 
coloured  and  display  the  thirty-two  characteristic 
signs. 

19.  They  shall  know  no  other  food  but  pleasure 
in  the  law  and  delight  in  knowledge.  No  woman- 
kind shall  be  there,  nor  fear  of  the  places  of  punish- 
ments or  of  dismal  states. 


198  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  YIII. 

20.  Such  shall  be  the  excellent  field  of  Pun^a,  who 
is  possessed  of  all  good  qualities ;  it  shall  abound 
with  all  goodly  things  ^  a  small  part  (only)  of  which 
has  here  been  mentioned. 

Then   this   thought  arose   in   the  mind  of  those 
twelve   hundred    self-controlled   (Arhats):    We    are 
struck  with  wonder  and  amazement.     (How)  if  the 
Tathagata  would  predict  to  us  severally  our  future 
destiny  as  the  Lord  has  done  to  those  other  great 
disciples  ?     And  the  Lord  apprehending  in  his  own 
mind  what  was  going  on  in  the  minds  of  these  great 
disciples  addressed    the  venerable    Maha-Ka^-yapa : 
Those  twelve  hundred  self-controlled  hearers  whom 
I  am  now  beholding  from  face  to  face,  to  all  those 
twelve  hundred  self-controlled  hearers,  Kai'yapa,  I 
will  presently  foretell  their  destiny.     Amongst  them, 
Ka^yapa,   the    monk   Kau;/^inya,   a   great    disciple, 
shall,  after  sixty-two  hundred  thousand  myriads  of 
ko/is  of  Buddhas,  become  a  Tathagata,  an  Arhat, 
&c.,  under  the  name  of  Samantaprabhasa,  endowed 
with  science  and  conduct,  a  Sugata,  &c.  &c, ;  but  of 
those  (twelve  hundred),  Ka^-yapa,  five  hundred  shall 
become  Tathagatas  of  the  same  name.     Thereafter 
shall  all   those  five  hundred  great   disciples  reach 
supreme  and  perfect  enlightenment,  all  bearing  the 
name  of  Samantaprabhasa;  viz.  Gaya-Ka^yapa,  Nadi- 
Kai'yapa,  Uruvilva-Kai^yapa,  Kala,  Kalodayin,  Ani- 
ruddha,    Kapphi/^a,    Vakkula  2,   A'unda  ^,  Svagata  ■*, 

^  Akir««a  sarvehi  subhadrakehi ;  Burnouf  takes  it  as  a  mascu- 
line, rendering  it  by  '  creatures  fortunees.' 

'^  Also  spelt  Vakula;  see  p.  2. 

^  Probably  the  same  with  Maha-^unda  in  Mahavagga  I,  6,  36 ; 
A'uUavaggal,  18,  i. 

*  Pali  Sagata,  Mahavagga  V,  i,  3. 


VIII.       DESTINY    OF    THE    FIVE    HUNDRED    MONKS.        IQQ 

and  the  rest  of  the  five  hundred  self-controlled 
(Arhats). 

And  on  that  occasion  the  Lord  uttered  the  fol- 
lowing stanzas  : 

21,  The  scion  of  the  Kujid'msi  family,  my  disciple 
here,  shall  in  future  be  a  Tathagata,  a  Lord  of  the 
world,  after  the  lapse  of  an  endless  period ;  he  shall 
educate  hundreds  of  ko/is  of  livincr  beings. 

2  2.  After  seeing  many  endless  Buddhas,  he  shall 
in  future,  after  the  lapse  of  an  endless  period,  be- 
come the  6"ina  Samantaprabhasa,  whose  field  shall 
be  thoroughly  pure. 

23.  Brilliant,  gifted  with  the  powers  of  a  Buddha, 
with  a  voice  far  resounding  in  all  quarters,  waited 
upon  by  thousands  of  ko/is  of  beings,  he  shall 
preach  supreme  and  eminent  enlightenment. 

24.  There  shall  be  most  zealous  Bodhisattvas, 
mounted  on  lofty  aereal  cars,  and  moving,  medi- 
tative, pure  in  morals,  and  assiduous  in  doing  good. 

25.  After  hearing  the  law  from  the  highest  of 
men,  they  shall  invariably  go  to  other  fields,  to 
salute  thousands  of  Buddhas  and  show  them  great 
honour. 

26.  But  ere  long  they  shall  return  to  the  field  of 
the  Leader  called  Prabhasa,  the  Tathagata  \  So 
great  shall  be  the  power  of  their  course  (of  duty). 

27.  The  measure  of  the  lifetime  of  that  Sugata 
shall  be  sixty  thousand  ^ons,  and,  after  the  com- 
plete extinction  of  that  mighty  one  ^  his  true  law 
shall  remain  twice  as  long  in  the  world. 

28.  And  the  counterfeit  of  it  shall  continue  three 


^  Var.  lect.  'the  most  high  (or  best)  of  men.' 
^  Tayin. 


200  SADDHARMA-PU-VDARIKA.  YIIL 


times  as  long.     When  the  true  law  of  that  holy  one 
shall  he  exhausted,  men  and  gods  shall  be  vexed. 

29.  There  shall  appear  a  complete  number  of  five 
hundred  Chiefs,  supreme  amongst  men,  who  shall 
bear  the  same  name  with  that  6^ina,  Samantaprabha, 
and  follow  one  another  in  regular  succession. 

30.  All  shall  have  like  divisions,  magical  powers, 
Buddha-fields,  and  hosts  (of  followers).  Their  true 
law  also  shall  be  the  same  and  stand  equally  long. 

31.  All  shall  have  in  this  world,  including  the 
gods,  the  same  voice  as  Samantaprabhasa,  the 
highest  of  men,  such  as  I  have  mentioned  before. 

32.  Moved  by  benevolence  and  compassion  they 
shall  in  succession  foretell  each  other's  destiny,  with 
the  words  :  This  is  to  be  my  immediate  successor, 
and  he  is  to  command  the  world  as  I  do  at  present. 

7,T,.  Thus,  Kai-yapa,  keep  now  in  vlew^  here 
these  self-controlled  (Arhats),  no  less  than  five  hun- 
dred (in  number),  as  well  as  my  other  disciples,  and 
speak  of  this  matter  to  the  other  disciples. 

On  hearing  from  the  Lord  the  announcement  of 
their  own  future  destiny,  the  five  hundred  Arhats, 
contented,  satisfied,  in  high  spirits  and  ecstasy,  filled 
with  cheerfulness,  joy,  and  delight,  went  up  to  the 
place  where  the  Lord  was  sitting,  reverentially  sa- 
luted with  their  heads  his  feet,  and  spoke  thus  :  We 
confess  our  fault,  O  Lord,  in  having  continually  and 
constantly  persuaded  ourselves  that  we  had  arrived 

^  Dharehi.  I  am  not  sure  of  the  correctness  of  this  translation; 
the  word  usually  means  '  to  keep,'  but  this  seems  out  of  place, 
unless  it  be  assumed  that  the  injunction  is  given  in  anticipation, 
because  Kaj-yapa  succeeded  to  the  Lord  after  the  latter's  Nirvawa. 
Burnouf  has :  '  Voila-comme  tu  dois  considerer  ici  en  ce  jour  ces 
Auditeurs,'  &c. 


VIII.       DESTINY    OF    THE    FIVE    HUNDRED    MONKS.        20I 

at  final  Nirvana,  as  (persons  who  are)  dull,  inept, 
ignorant  of  the  rules.  For,  O  Lord,  whereas  we 
should  have  thoroughly  penetrated  the  knowledge 
of  the  Tathagatas,  we  were  content  with  such  a 
trifling  degree  of  knowledge. 

It  is,  O  Lord,  as  if  some  man  having  come  to  a 
friend's  house  got  drunk  or  fell  asleep,  and  that 
friend  bound  a  priceless  gem  within  ^  his  garment, 
with  the  thought :  Let  this  gem  be  his.  After  a 
while,  O  Lord,  that  man  rises  from  his  seat  and 
travels  further;  he  goes  to  some  other  country, 
where  he  is  befallen  by  incessant  difficulties,  and  has 
great  trouble  to  find  food  and  clothing.  By  dint  of 
great  exertion  he  is  hardly  able  to  obtain  a  bit  of 
food,  with  which  (however)  he  is  contented  and  satis- 
fied. The  old  friend  of  that  man,  O  Lord,  who  bound 
within  the  man's  garment  that  priceless  gem,  hap- 
pens to  see  him  again  and  says  :  How  is  it,  good 
friend,  that  thou  hast  such  difficulty  in  seeking  food 
and  clothing,  while  I,  in  order  that  thou  shouldst 
live  in  ease,  good  friend,  have  bound  within  thy 
garment  a  priceless  gem,  quite  sufficient  to  fulfil  all 
thy  wishes?  I  have  given  thee  that  gem,  my  good 
friend,  the  very  gem  I  have  bound  within  thy 
garment.  Still  thou  art  deliberating :  What  has 
been  bound  ?  by  whom  ?  for  what  reason  and  pur- 
pose ?  It  is  something  foolish  ^,  my  good  friend,  to 
be  contented,  when  thou  hast  with  (so  much)  difficulty 
to  procure  food  and  clothing.  Go,  my  good  friend, 
betake   thyself,  with   this  gem,  to  some  great  city, 


^  Vastrante,  vasanante;    below  in  stanza  40  we  find  vasa- 
nantarasmi. 

^  Etad  bala^atiyam. 


202  SADDHARMA-PUJVDARIKA.  YIII. 


exchange  the  gem  for  money,  and  with  that  money 
do  all  that  can  be  done  with  money. 

In  the  same  manner,  O  Lord,  has  the  Tathagata 
formerly,  when  he  still  followed  the  course  of  duty 
of  a  Bodhisattva,  raised  in  us  also  ideas  of  omni- 
science, but  we,  O  Lord,  did  not  perceive,  nor  know  it. 
We  fancied,  O  Lord,  that  on  the  stage  of  Arhat  we 
had  reached  Nirva^za.    We  live  in  difficulty,  O  Lord, 
because  we   content   ourselves  with   such  a  trifling 
degree  of  knowledge.     But  as  our  strong  aspiration 
after  the  knowledge   of  the   all-knowing  has  never 
ceased,  the  Tathagata  teaches  us  the  right :  '  Have 
no  such  idea  of  Nirva;2a,  monks ;  there  are  in  your 
intelligence  ^  roots  of  goodness  which  of  yore  I  have 
fully  developed.     In  this  you  have  to  see  an  able 
device  of  mine  that  from  the  expressions  used  by 
me,   in    preaching  the    law,  you   fancy   Nirva;^a  to 
take    place   at  this    moment  2.'     And    after   having 
taught  us  the  right  in  such  a  way,  the  Lord  now 
predicts  our  future  destiny  to  supreme  and  perfect 
knowledge. 

And  on  that  occasion  the  five  hundred  self-con- 
trolled (Arhats),  Ac^;1ata-Kau;^^inya  and  the  rest, 
uttered  the  following  stanzas  : 

34.  We  are  rejoicing  and  delighted  to  hear  this 
unsurpassed  word  of  comfort  that  we  are  destined 
to  the  highest,  supreme  enlightenment.  Homage 
be  to  thee,  O  Lord  of  unlimited  sight ! 

35.  We  confess  our  fault  before  thee ;  we  were 
so  childish,  nescient,  ignorant  that  we  were  fully 
contented  with  a  small  part  of  Nirva/^a,  under  the 
mastership  of  the  Sugata. 


Santane.  ^  Or,  at  present,  etarhi. 


VIII.       DESTINY    OF    THE    FIVE    HUNDRED    MONKS.        2O3 

36.  This  is  a  case  like  that  of  a  certain  man  who 
enters  the  house  of  a  friend,  which  friend,  being  rich 
and  wealthy,  gives  him  much  food,  both  hard  and 
soft. 

^J.  After  satiating  him  with  nourishment,  he 
gives  him  a  jewel  of  great  value.  He  ties  it  with  a 
knot  within  the  upper  robe  and  feels  satisfaction  at 
having  given  that  jewel. 

38.  The  other  man,  unaware  of  it,  goes  forth  and 
from  that  place  travels  to  another  town.  There  he 
is  befallen  with  misfortune  and,  as  a  miserable  beg- 
gar, seeks  his  food  in  affliction. 

39.  He  is  contented  with  the  pittance  he  gets  by 
begging  without  caring  for  dainty  food  ;  as  to  that 
jewel,  he  has  forgotten  it ;  he  has  not  the  slightest 
remembrance  of  its  having  been  tied  in  his  upper 
robe. 

40.  Under  these  circumstances  he  is  seen  by  his 
old  friend  who  at  home  gave  him  that  jewel.  This 
friend  properly  reprimands  him  and  shows  him  the 
jewel  within  his  robe. 

41.  At  this  sight  the  man  feels  extremely  happy. 
The  value  of  the  jewel  is  such  that  he  becomes  a 
very  rich  man,  of  great  power,  and  in  possession  of 
all  that  the  five  senses  can  enjoy. 

42.  In  the  same  manner,  O  Lord,  we  were  un- 
aware of  our  former  aspiration  ^  (the  aspiration)  laid 
in  us  by  the  Tathagata  himself  in  previous  existences 
from  time  immemorial. 

43.  And  we  were  living  in  this  world,  O  Lord, 
with  dull  understanding  and  in  ignorance,  under  the 

^  Prawidhana;  from  the  context  one  would  gather  that  the 
real  meaning  had  been  '  predestination.' 


204  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  VIII. 

mastership  of  the  Sugata ;  for  we  were  contented  with 
a  httle  of  Nirva;2a ;  we  required  nothing  higher,  nor 
even  cared  for  it. 

44.  But  the  Friend  of  the  world  has  taught  us 
better  :  '  This  is  no  blessed  Rest  ^  at  all ;  the  full 
knowledge  of  the  highest  men  ^,  that  is  blessed  Rest, 
that  is  supreme  beatitude.' 

45.  After  hearing  this  sublime,  grand,  splendid, 
and  matchless  prediction,  O  Lord,  we  are  greatly 
elated  with  joy,  when  thinking  of  the  prediction 
(we  shall  have  to  make  to  each  other)  in  regular 
succession. 

^  NirvrAi.  ^  Purushottamanam. 


IX.  DESTINY    OF    ANANDA,    RAHULA,    ETC.  205 


CHAPTER   IX. 

ANNOUNCEMENT  OF  THE  FUTURE  DESTINY  OF  ANANDA, 
RAHULA,  AND  THE  TWO  THOUSAND  MONKS. 

On  that  occasion  the  venerable  Ananda  made 
this  reflection:  Should  we  also  receive  a  similar 
prediction  ?  Thus  thinking,  pondering,  wishing,  he 
rose  from  his  seat,  prostrated  himself  at  the  Lord's 
feet  and  uttered  the  following  words.  And  the 
venerable    Rahula   also,    in   whom    rose    the    same 

A 

thought  and  the  same  wish  as  in  Ananda,  prostrated 
himself  at  the  Lord's  feet,  and  uttered  these  words : 
*  Let  it  be  our  turn  also,  O  Lord ;  let  it  be  our  turn 
also,  O  Sugata.  The  Lord  is  our  father  and  pro- 
creator,  our  refuge  and  protection.  For  in  this 
world,  including  men,  gods,  and  demons,  O  Lord,  we 
are  particularly  distinguished  ^  as  people  say  :  These 
are  the  Lord's  sons,  the  Lord's  attendants  ;  these  are 
the  keepers  of  the  law-treasure  of  the  Lord.  There- 
fore, Lord,  it  would  seem  meet  2,  were  the  Lord  ere 
long  to  predict  our  destiny  to  supreme  and  perfect 
enliofhtenment.' 

Two  thousand  other  monks,  and  more,  both  such 
as  were  still  under  training  and  such  as  were  not, 
likewise  rose  from  their  seats,  put  their  upper  robes 
upon   one    shoulder,    stretched   their  joined   hands 


^  Or  respected, /^itrikrz'ta;  cf.  Pali /^ittikara  and  Sansk.  ^itrt- 
kara,  Lalita-vistara,  p.  347. 
'^  Pratirfipa. 


206  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  IX. 

towards  the  Lord  and  remained  gazing  up  to  him, 
all  pre-occupied  with  the  same  thought,  viz.  of  this 
very  Buddha-knowledge  :  Should  we  also  receive 
a  prediction  of  our  destiny  to  supreme  and  perfect 
enligfhtenment. 

Then  the  Lord  addressed  the  venerable  Ananda 

A 

in  these  words :  Thou,  Ananda,  shalt  in  future 
become  a  Tathagata  by  the  name  of  Sagaravaradha- 
rabuddhivikri^T^itabhi^'T^a  \  an  Arhat,  &c.,  endowed 
with  science  and  conduct,  &c.  After  having  honoured, 
respected,  venerated,  and  worshipped  sixty-two  ko/is 
of  Buddhas,  kept  in  memory  the  true  law  of  those 
Buddhas  and  received  this  command,  thou  shalt 
arrive  at  supreme  and  perfect  enlightenment,  and 
bring  to  full  ripeness  for  supreme,  perfect  enlighten- 
ment twenty  hundred  thousand  myriads  of  ko/is  of 
Bodhisattvas  similar  to  the  sands  of  twenty  Ganges  ^. 
And  thy  Buddha-field  shall  consist  of  lapis  lazuli 
and  be  superabundant.  The  sphere  shall  be  named 
Anavanamita-vai^ayanta  and  the  ^on  Mano^7/a- 
^•abdabhigar^ita.  The  lifetime  of  that  Lord  Sagara- 
varadharabuddhivikri^itabhi^/7a,  the  Tathagata,  &c., 
shall  measure  an  immense  number  of  /Eons,  ^ons 

^  The  epithet  Sagaravaradharavipulabuddhi,  i.e.  having  the  great 
intelligence  of  Sagaravaradhara,  is  bestowed  on  the  Bodhisattva 
destined  to  be  born  as  ^'akyamuni,  LoUta-vistara,  p.  lo.  As  the 
next  preceding  epithet,  1.  c.  mahapadmagarbhekshawa,  seems 
to  point  to  the  sun,  I  infer  that  Sagaravara,  the  choicest  of  oceans, 
denotes  Soma,  and  Sagaravaradhara,  the  keeper  of  that  ocean,  the 
moon. 

^  According  to  the  reading  viwj'atiw  Ganganadivalikopamani ; 
var.  lect.  has  vi»wati-Ganga°,  so  that  Burnouf  s  rendering  '  egal  a 
celui  des  sables  de  vingt  fleuves  du  Gange '  is  admissible.  On  the 
other  hand  it  must  be  remarked  that  we  shall  meet  in  the  sequel 
with  the  phrase  bahfini  Gahganadivalikopamani  Buddhako/inayuta- 
jata  sahasrawi. 


IX.  DESTINY    OF    ANANDA,    RAHULA,    ETC.  lO'] 


the  term  of  which  is  not  to  be  found  by  calculation. 
So  many  hundred  thousand  myriads  of  ko/is  of 
incalculable  ^ons  shall  last  the  lifetime  of  that 
Lord.  Twice  as  long,  Ananda,  after  the  complete 
extinction  of  that  Lord,  shall  his  true  law  stand, 
and  twice  as  long  again  shall  continue  its  counter- 
feit. And  further,  Ananda,  many  hundred  thousand 
myriads  of  ko/is  of  Buddhas,  similar  to  the  sands  of 
the  river  Ganges,  shall  in  all  directions  of  space  speak 
the  praise  of  that  Tathagata  Sagaravaradharabud- 
dhivikri^itabhi^/7a,  the  Arhat,  &c. 

1.  I  announce  to  you,  congregated  monks,  that 
Ananda-Bhadra,  the  keeper  of  my  law,  shall  in 
future  become  a  Cina,  after  having  worshipped  sixty 
ko/is  of  Sugatas. 

2.  He  shall  be  widely  renowned  by  the  name  of 
Sagarabuddhidharin  Abhi^;1aprapta  \  in  a  beautiful, 
thoroughly  clear  field,  (termed)  Anavanata  Vai^ayantt 
(i.  e.  triumphal  banner  unlowered). 

3.  There  shall  be  Bodhisattvas  like  the  sands  of  the 
Ganges  and  even  more,  whom  he  shall  bring  to  full 
ripeness ;  he  shall  be  a  6^ina  endowed  with  great 
(magical)  power,  whose  word  shall  widely  resound  in 
all  quarters  of  the  world. 

4.  The  duration  of  his  life  shall  be  immense.  He 
shall  always  be  benign  and  merciful  to  the  world. 
After  the  complete  extinction  of  that  6'ina  and 
mighty  saint  ^  his  true  law  shall  stand  twice  as 
long. 

5.  The  counterfeit  (shall  continue)  twice  as  long 


^  These  names  may  be  translated  by  '  possessor  of  an  intellect 
(unfathomable)  as  the  ocean,  having  arrived  at  transcendent 
wisdom.' 

^  Tayin. 


208  SADDHARMA-PUiViJARtKA.  IX. 


under  the  rule  ^  of  that  6^ina.  Then  also  shall 
beings  like  grains  of  sand  of  the  Ganges  produce  in 
this  world  what  is  the  cause  of  Buddha-enlig-hten- 
ment. 

In  that  assembly  were  eight  thousand  Bodhisat- 
tvas  who  had  newly  entered  the  vehicle.  To  them 
this  thought  presented  itself:  Never  before  did  we 
have  such  a  sublime  prediction  to  Bodhisattvas,  far 
less  to  disciples.  What  may  be  the  cause  of  it  ? 
what  the  motive  ?  The  Lord,  who  apprehended  in 
his  mind  what  was  going  on  in  the  minds  of  those 
Bodhisattvas,  addressed  them  in  these  words  :  Young 
men  of  good  family,  I  and  Ananda  have  in  the  same 
moment,  the  same  instant  conceived  the  idea  of 
supreme  and  perfect  enlightenment  in  the  presence 
of  the  Tathagata  Dharmagahanabhyudgatara^a^,  the 
Arhat,  &c.  At  that  period,  young  men  of  good  family, 
he  (Ananda)  constantly  and  assiduously  applied  him- 
self to  great  learning,  whereas  I  was  applying  my- 
self to  strenuous  labour.  Hence  I  sooner  arrived  at 
supreme  and  perfect  enlightenment,  whilst  Ananda- 
Bhadra  was  the  keeper  of  the  law-treasure  of  the 
Lords  Buddhas ;  that  is  to  say,  young  men  of  good 
family,  he  made  a  vow  ^  to  bring  Bodhisattvas  to  full 
development. 

When  the  venerable  Ananda  heard  from  the 
Lord  the  announcement  of  his  own  destiny  to 
supreme  and  perfect  enlightenment,  when  he  learned 
the  good  qualities  of  his  Buddha-field  and  its  divi- 
sions, when  he  heard  of  the  vow  he  had  made  in  the 


^  I.e.  reign,  epoch  inaugurated  by  him. 

"^  Var.  lect.  Dharmagagana°  and  Dharmagamana°. 

^  Pra;/idhana. 


A  . 


IX.  DESTINY    OF    ANANDA,    RAHULA,    ETC.  209 

past,  he  felt  pleased,  exultant,  ravished,  joyous,  filled 
with  cheerfulness  and  delight.  And  at  that  juncture 
he  remembered  the  true  law  of  many  hundred  thou- 
sand myriads  of  ko/is  of  Buddhas  and  his  own  vow 
of  yore. 

And  on  that  occasion  the  venerable  Ananda 
uttered  the  following  stanzas : 

6.  Wonderful,  boundless  are  the  6^inas  ^  who  re- 
mind us  of  the  law  preached  by  the  extinct  Chinas 
and  mighty  saints  2.  Now  I  remember  it  as  if  it 
had  happened  to-day  or  yesterday  ^. 

7.  I  am  freed  from  all  doubts ;  I  am  ready  for 
enlightenment.  Such  is  my  skilfulness,  (as)  I  am 
the  servitor '',  and  keep  the  true  law  for  the  sake 
of  enlightenment. 

Thereupon  the  Lord  addressed  the  venerable 
Rahula-Bhadra  in  these  words  :  Thou,  Rahula,  shalt 
be  in  future  a  Tathagata  of  the  name  of  Saptaratna- 
padmavikrantagamin  ^  an  Arhat,  &c.,  endowed  with 
science  and  conduct,  &c.  After  having  honoured, 
respected,  venerated,  worshipped  a  number  of  Tatha- 
gatas,  &c.,  equal  to  the  atoms  of  ten  worlds,  thou 
shalt  always  be  the  eldest  son  of  those  Lords 
Buddhas,  just  as  thou  art  mine  at  present.  And, 
Rahula,  the  measure  of  the  lifetime  of  that  Lord 
Saptaratnapadmavikrantagamin,  the  Tathagata,  &c., 
and  the  abundance  of  all  sorts  of  good  qualities 
(belonging  to  him)  shall  be  exactly  the  same  as  of 


^  This  may  be  interpreted  as  being  a  pluralis  majestatis. 
^  Tayin. 

®  Adya  svo  va;  cf.  note  2,  p.  154. 

*  Pari-^araka,  synonymous  with  upasthayaka,  one  who  is  in 
attendance,  in  readiness,  an  attendant,  a  servitor,  a  satellite. 
^  So  my  MSS. ;  Burnouf  has  Saptaratnapadmavikramin. 

[21]  P 


2IO  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  IX. 


the  Lord  Sagaravaradharabuddhlvikri^/Itabhi^;1a,  the 
Tathaeata,  &c. ;  Hkewise  shall  the  divisions  of  the 
Buddha-field  and  its  qualities  be  the  same  as  those 
possessed  by  that  Lord.  And,  Rahula,  thou  shalt 
be  the  eldest  son  of  that  Tathagata  Sagaravara- 
dharabuddhivikrirt'itabhi^wa,  the  Arhat,  &c.  After- 
wards thou  shalt  arrive  at  supreme  and  perfect 
enlightenment. 

8.  Rahula  here,  my  own  eldest  son,  who  was  born 
to  me  when  I  was  a  prince  royal,  he,  my  son,  after 
my  reaching  enlightenment,  is  a  great  Seer,  an  heir 
to  the  law  ^. 

9.  The  great  number  of  ko/is  of  Buddhas  which  he 
shall  see  in  future,  is  Immense.  To  all  these  G'mas 
he  shall  be  a  son,  striving  after  enlightenment. 

10.  Unknown  is  this  course  (of  duty)  to  Rihula^, 
but  I  know  his  (former)  vow.  He  glorifies  the 
Friend  of  the  world  ^  (by  saying) :  I  am,  forsooth,  the 
Tathagata's  son. 

11.  Innumerable  myriads  of  ko/is  of  good  quali- 
ties, the  measure  of  which  is  never  to  be  found, 
appertain  to  this  Rahula,  my  son ;  for  it  has  been 
said  :  He  exists  by  reason  of  enlightenment. 

The  Lord  now  again  regarded  those  two  thousand 
disciples,  both  such  as  were  still  under  training  and 
such  as  were  not,  who  were  looking  up  to  him  with 
serene,  mild,  placid  minds.  And  the  Lord  then 
addressed  the  venerable  Ananda :  Seest  thou, 
Ananda,  these  two  thousand  disciples,  both  such  as 
are   still  under  training  and  such  as  are   not  ?     '  I 

^  Cf.  the  myth  according  to  which  Rahu,  the  personified  eclipse, 
came  in  for  his  share  before  Brahma,  the  father  of  the  world. 
2  Or  of  Rahula. 
'  Lokabandhu,  from  elsewhere  known  as  an  epithet  of  the  sun. 


IX.  DESTINY    OF    ANANDA,    RAHULA,    ETC.  2  I  I 

do,  Lord ;  I  do,  Sugata.'  The  Lord  proceeded : 
All  these  two  thousand  monks,  Ananda,  shall 
simultaneously  accomplish  the  course  of  Bodhi- 
sattvas,  and  after  honouring,  respecting,  venerating, 
worshipping  Buddhas  as  numerous  as  the  atoms 
of  fifty  worlds,  and  after  acquiring  the  true  law, 
they  shall,  in  their  last  bodily  existence,  attain 
supreme  and  perfect  enlightenment  at  the  same 
time,  the  same  moment,  the  same  instant,  the  same 
juncture  in  all  directions  of  space,  in  different  worlds, 
each  in  his  own  Buddha-field.  They  shall  become 
Tathagatas,  Arhats,  &c.,  by  the  name  of  Ratnake- 
turi^as  ^  Their  lifetime  shall  last  a  complete  ^on. 
The  division  and  good  qualities  of  their  Buddha- 
fields  shall  be  equal ;  equal  also  shall  be  the  number 
of  the  congregation  of  their  disciples  and  Bodhi- 
sattvas  ;  equal  also  shall  be  their  complete  extinction, 
and  their  true  law  shall  continue  an  equal  time. 

And  on  that  occasion  the  Lord  uttered  the  fol- 
lowing stanzas : 

12.  These  two  thousand  disciples,  Ananda,  who 
here  are  standing  before  me,  to  them,  the  sages, 
I  now  predict  that  in  future  they  shall  become 
Tathagatas. 

13.  After  having  paid  eminent  worship  to  the 
Buddhas,  by  means  of  infinite  comparisons  and 
examples,  they  shall,  when  standing  in  their  last 
bodily  existence,  reach  my  extreme  enlightenment. 

14.  They  shall  all,  under  the  same  name,  in  every 
direction,  at   the   same    moment   and    instant,    and 

^  In  astrological  works,  in  the  enumeration  of  Grahas  (sun, 
moon,  planets,  &c.),  the  Ketus  are  constantly  named  after  Rahu. 
It  is  hardly  fortuitous  that  here  we  find  these  '  kings  of  Ketus ' 
mentioned  immediately  after  Rahula. 

P  2 


212  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARiKA.  IX. 


sitting  at  the  foot  of  the  most  exalted  tree,  become 
Buddhas,  after  they  shall  have  reached  the  know- 
ledge. 

15.  All  shall  bear  the  same  name  of  Ketus^  of 
the  Ratna,  by  which  they  shall  be  widely  famed  in 
this  world.  Their  excellent  fields  shall  be  equal, 
and  equal  the  congregation  of  disciples  and  Bodhi- 
sattvas. 

16.  Strong  in  magic  power,  they  shall  all  simul- 
taneously, in  every  direction  of  space,  reveal  the  law 
in  this  world  and  all  at  once  ^  become  extinct ;  their 
true  law  shall  last  equally  long. 

And  the  disciples,  both  such '  as  were  still  under 
training  and  such  as  were  not,  on  hearing  from  the 
Lord,  face  to  face,  the  prediction  concerning  each  of 
them,  were  pleased,  exultant,  ravished,  joyous,  filled 
with  cheerfulness  and  delight,  and  addressed  the 
Lord  with  the  following  stanzas  : 

J  7.  We  are  satisfied,  O  Light  of  the  world,  to  hear 
this  prediction ;  we  are  pleased,  O  Tathagata,  as  if 
sprinkled  with  nectar. 

18.  We  have  no  doubt,  no  uncertainty  that  we 
shall  become  supreme  amongst  men ;  to-day  we 
have  obtained  felicity,  because  we  have  heard  that 
prediction. 


1  Ketumala,  apparently  ' cluster  of  Ketus,'  is  the  appellation 
of  the  western  region ;  Ketumat  is  a  ruler  of  the  western  quarter, 
i.e.  the  personification  of  the  west.  The  phrase  rendered  by 
'standing  in  their  last  bodily  existence'  (paj>^ime  samu/^>^/^raye), 
in  stanza  1 3,  also  means  '  standing  in  their  elevation  in  the  west.' 

2  MSS.  have  sad  a  pi,  but  this  is  obviously  a  clerical  error  for 
sahapi. 


X.  THE    PREACHER.  213 


CHAPTER    X. 


THE   PREACHER. 


The  Lord  then  addressed  the  eighty  thousand 
Bodhisattvas  Mahasattvas  by  turning  to  Bhaisha- 
^^ara^a  as  their  representative.  Seest  thou,  Bhai- 
sha^yard^a,  in  this  assembly  the  many  gods,  Nagas, 
gobhns,  Gandharvas,  demons,  Garu^^as,  Kinnaras, 
great  serpents,  men,  and  beings  not  human,  monks, 
nuns,  male  and  female  lay  devotees,  votaries  of  the 
vehicle  of  disciples,  votaries  of  the  vehicle  of  Pratye- 
kabuddhas,  and  those  of  the  vehicle  of  Bodhi- 
sattvas, who  have  heard  this  Dharmaparyaya  from 
the  mouth  of  the  Tathdgata  ?  '  I  do,  Lord ;  I  do, 
Sugata.'  The  Lord  proceeded :  Well,  Bhaisha- 
^yard^a,  all  those  Bodhisattvas  Mahasattvas  who  in 
this  assembly  have  heard,  were  it  but  a  single  stanza, 
a  single  verse  (or  word),  or  who  even  by  a  single 
rising  thought  have  joyfully  accepted  this  SCitra,  to 
all  of  them,  Bhaisha^yara^a,  among  the  four  classes 
of  my  audience  I  predict  their  destiny  to  supreme  and 
perfect  enlightenment.  And  all  whosoever,  Bhai- 
sha^yara^a,  who,  after  the  complete  extinction  of  the 
Tathagata,  shall  hear  this  Dharmaparyaya  and  after 
hearing,  were  it  but  a  single  stanza,  joyfully  accept 
it,  even  with  a  single  rising  thought,  to  those  also, 
Bhaisha^ara^a,  be  they  young  men  or  young  ladies 
of  good  family,  I  predict  their  destiny  to  supreme  and 
perfect  enlightenment.     Those  young  men  or  ladies 


214  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  X. 

of  good  family,  Bhaisha^yaraj^a,  shall  be  worship- 
pers of  many  hundred  thousand  myriads  of  ko/is 
of  Buddhas.  Those  young  men  or  ladies  of  good 
family,  Bhaisha^ara^a,  shall  have  made  a  vow 
under  hundred  thousands  of  myriads  of  ko/is  of 
Buddhas.  They  must  be  considered  as  being 
reborn  amongst  the  people  of  6^ambudvipa\  out  of 
compassion  to  all  creatures.  Those  who  shall  take, 
read,  make  known,  recite,  copy,  and  after  copying 
always  keep  in  memory  and  from  time  to  time 
regard  were  it  but  a  single  stanza  of  this  Dharma- 
paryiya ;  who  by  that  book  ^  shall  feel  veneration 
for  the  Tathdgatas,  treat  them  with  the  respect  due 
to  Masters  ^,  honour,  revere,  worship  them ;  who 
shall  worship  that  book  with  flowers,  incense,  per- 
fumed garlands,  ointment,  powder,  clothes,  umbrellas, 
flags,  banners,  music,  &c,,  and  with  acts  of  reverence 
such  as  bowing  and  joining  hands ;  in  short,  Bhai- 
sha^yar^^a,  any  young  men  or  young  ladies  of 
good  family  who  shall  keep  or  joyfully  accept  were 
it  but  a  single  stanza  of  this  Dharmaparyaya,  to 
all  of  them,  Bhaisha^ara^a,  I  predict  their  being 
destined  to  supreme  and  perfect  enlightenment. 

Should  some  man  or  woman,  Bhaisha^yara^a, 
happen  to  ask :  How  now  have  those  creatures  to 
be  who  in  future  are  to  become  Tathagatas,  Arhats, 
&c.  ?  then  that  man  or  woman  should  be  referred  to 
the  example  of  that  young  man  or  young  lady  of  good 
family.     '  Whoever  is  able  to  keep,  recite,  or  teach, 

^  I.  e.  India. 

^  Tasmin  pustake,  literally  'at  that  book,' i.e.  when  that  book 
is  being  read,  written,  heard,  &c. 

^  »S'astrz'gaurave«a  satkarishyanti.  I  take  the  instrumental 
case  here  to  be  the  instrumental  of  manner. 


X.  THE    PREACHER.  215 

were  it  but  a  single  stanza  of  four  lines,  and  who- 
ever shows  respect  for  this  Dharmaparyaya,  that 
young  man  or  young  lady  of  good  family  shall  in 
future  become  a  Tathagata,  &c. ;  be  persuaded  of 
it.'  For,  Bhaisha^yarafa,  such  a  young  man  or 
young  lady  of  good  family  must  be  considered  to 
be  a  Tathagata,  and  by  the  whole  world,  including 
the  gods,  honour  should  be  done  to  such  a  Tatha- 
gata who  keeps  were  it  but  a  single  stanza  of 
this  Dharmaparyiya,  and  far  more,  of  course,  to 
one  who  grasps,  keeps,  comprehends,  makes  known, 
copies,  and  after  copying  always  retains  in  his  memory 
this  Dharmaparyaya  entirely  and  completely,  and  who 
honours  that  book  with  flowers,  incense,  perfumed 
garlands,  ointment,  powder,  clothes,  umbrellas,  flags, 
banners,  music,  joined  hands,  reverential  bows  and 
salutations.  Such  a  young  man  or  young  lady  of 
good  family,  Bhaisha^yara^a,  must  be  held  to  be 
accomplished  in  supreme  and  perfect  enlightenment ; 
must  be  held  to  be  the  like  of  a  Tathagata,  who  out 
of  compassion  and  for  the  benefit  of  the  world,  by 
virtue  of  a  former  vow,  makes  his  appearance  here 
in  6'ambudvipa,  in  order  to  make  this  Dharmapar- 
yaya generally  known.  Whosoever,  after  leaving^ 
his  own  lofty  conception  of  the  law  ^  and  the  lofty 
Buddha-field  occupied  by  him,  in  order  to  make 
generally   known    this     Dharmaparyaya,    after    my 

^  Sthapayitva,  which  commonly  means  'apart  from,  barring.' 
2  Ya/i  sva/?^  (var.  lect.  yas  tara) — dharmabhisaw/skaraw.  If  we 
follow  the  former  reading,  sthapayitva  can  hardly  be  taken  in 
the  sense  of  apart  from  ;'  in  the  other  case  it  would  be  possible, 
though  I  should  be  at  a  loss  to  guess  the  purport  of  the  phrase. 
The  real  meaning  of  dharmabhisa?«skara  is,  probably, '  position 
in  life '  or  '  religion.'     Cf.  stanza  4  below. 


2l6  SADDHARMA-PUiV^DARlKA.  X. 

complete  Nirva;2a,  may  be  deemed  to  have  ap- 
peared^ in  the  predicament  of  a  Tathagata^,  such 
a  one,  Bhaisha^yara^a,  be  it  a  young  man  or  a 
young  lady  of  good  family,  must  be  held  to  perform 
the  function  of  the  Tathagata,  to  be  a  deputy  of  the 
Tathagata.  As  such,  Bhaisha^yara^a,  should  be 
acknowledged  the  young  man  or  the  young  lady  of 
good  family,  who  communicates  this  Dharma- 
paryaya,  after  the  complete  Nirva;2a  of  the  Tatha- 
gata, were  it  but  in  secret  or  by  stealth  or  to  one 
single  creature  that  he  communicated  or  told  it. 

Again,  Bhaisha^yara^a,  if  some  creature  vicious, 
wicked,  and  cruel-minded  should  in  the  (current) 
Age  speak  something  injurious  in  the  face  of  the 
Tathagata,  and  if  some  should  utter  a  single  harsh 
word,  founded  or  unfounded,  to  those  irreproachable 
preachers  of  the  law  and  keepers  of  this  Sutranta, 
whether  lay  devotees  or  clergymen,  I  declare  that 
the  latter  sin  is  the  graver.  For,  Bhaisha/y^ara^a, 
such  a  young  man  or  young  lady  of  good  family 
must  be  held  to  be  adorned  with  the  apparel  of  the 
Tathagata.  He  carries  the  Tathagata  on  his 
shoulder,  Bhaisha^yara^a,  who  after  having  copied 
this  Dharmaparyaya  and  made  a  volume  of  it, 
carries  it  on  his  shoulder.  Such  a  one,  wherever  he 
goes,  must  be  saluted  by  all  beings  with  joined 
hands,  must  be  honoured,  respected,  worshipped, 
venerated,  revered  by  gods  and  men  with  flowers, 
incense,  perfumed  garlands, ointment,  powder,  clothes, 
umbrellas,  flags,  banners,  musical  instruments,  with 


^  Upapanna,  an  ambiguous  term  ;  it  may  also  mean  '  fit.' 
2  Tathagata-bhuta;  a  var.  lect.  has  Tathagata-duta,  a  mes- 
senger, a  deputy  of  the  Tathagata. 


X.  THE    PREACHER.  21/ 

food,  soft  and  hard,  with  nourishment  and  drink,  with 
vehicles,  with  heaps  of  choice  and  gorgeous  jewels. 
That  preacher  of  the  law  must  be  honoured  by 
heaps  of  gorgeous  jewels  being  presented  to  that 
preacher  of  the  law.  For  it  may  be  that  by  his 
expounding  this  Dharmaparyaya,  were  it  only  once, 
innumerable,  incalculable  beings  who  hear  it  shall 
soon  become  accomplished  in  supreme  and  perfect 
enlightenment. 

And  on  that  occasion  the  Lord  uttered  the  fol- 
lowinof  stanzas : 

1.  He  who  wishes  to  be  established  in  Buddha- 
hood  and  aspires  to  the  knowledge  of  the  Self-born  ^, 
must  honour  those  who  keep  this  doctrine. 

2.  And  he  who  is  desirous  of  omniscience  and 
thinks :  How  shall  I  soonest  reach  it  ?  must  try  to 
know  this  Sutra  by  heart,  or  at  least  honour  one 
who  knows  it. 

3.  He  has  been  sent  by  the  Lord  of  the  world  to 
convert  (or  catechise)  men,  he  who  out  of  compas- 
sion for  mankind  recites  this  Sutra  ^. 

4.  After  giving  up  a   good  position,  that  great  ' 
man  ^  has  come  hither,  he  who  out  of  compassion 
for  mankind  keeps  this  Sutra  (in  memory). 

5.  It  is  by  force  of  his  position,  that  in  the  last 
times  he  is  seen  preaching  this  unsurpassed  Sutra. 

6.  That  preacher  of  the  law  must  be  honoured 


^  Svayambhu^wana,  which,  to  my  apprehension,  is  an  altera- 
tion of  brahmavidya. 

^  From  such  a  passage  as  this  one  might  be  tempted  to  believe 
that  it  had  been  the  intention  of  the  author  of  this  verse  to  repre- 
sent Buddha  as  eternal ;  cf.  Burnouf  s  remarks  in  his  Introduction, 
p.  119. 

^  I.  e.  the  preacher  or  catechiser. 


2i8  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  X. 


with  divine  and  human  flowers  and  all  sorts  of  per- 
fumes ;  be  decked  with  divine  cloth  and  strewed 
with  jewels. 

7.  One  should  always  reverentially  salute  him 
with  joined  hands,  as  if  he  were  the  Chief  of  (Spinas 
or  the  Self-born,  he  who  in  these  most  dreadful,  last 
days  keeps  this  SCltra  of  the  Extinct  (Buddha). 

8.  One  should  give  food,  hard  and  soft,  nourish- 
ment and  drink,  lodging  in  a  convent,  ko/is  of  robes 
to  honour  the  son  of  6^ina,  when  he  has  propounded, 
be  it  but  once,  this  Sutra. 

9.  He  performs  the  task  of  the  Tathagatas  and 
has  been  sent  by  me  to  the  world  of  men,  he  who  in 
the  last  days  shall  copy,  keep,  or  hear  this  Siitra. 

10.  The  man  who  in  wickedness  of  heart  or  with 
frowning  brow  should  at  any  time  of  a  whole  y^on 
utter  something  injurious  in  my  presence,  commits  a 
great  sin. 

11.  But  one  who  reviles  and  abuses  those  euar- 

o 

dians  of  this  Sutrdnta,  when  they  are  expounding 
this  Sutra,  I  say  that  he  commits  a  still  greater  sin. 

12.  The  man  who,  striving  for  superior  enlighten- 
ment, shall  in  a  complete  yEon  praise  me  in  my 
face  with  joined  hands,  with  many  myriads  of  ko/is 
of  stanzas, 

13.  Shall  thence  derive  a  great  merit,  since  he 
has  glorified  me  in  gladness  of  heart.  But  a  still 
greater  merit  shall  he  acquire  who  pronounces  the 
praise  of  those  (preachers). 

14.  One  who  shall  during  eighteen  thousand 
ko/is  of  ^ons  pay  worship  to  those  objects  of 
veneration  \  with  words,  visible  things,  flavours, 
with  divine  scents  and  divine  kinds  of  touch. 


^  Pusteshu.    I  think  that  these  pustas,  models,  images,  denote 


X.  THE    PREACHER.  2ig 

15.  If  such  a  one,  by  his  paying  that  worship  to 
the  objects  of  veneration  during  eighteen  thousand 
ko/is  of  yEons,  happens  to  hear  this  Siitra,  were  it 
only  once,  he  shall  obtain  an  amazingly  great 
advantage. 

I  announce  to  thee,  Bhaisha^yara^a,  I  declare  to 
thee,  that  many  are  the  Dharmaparyayas  which  I  have 
propounded,  am  propounding,  and  shall  propound. 
And  among  all  those  Dharmaparyayas,  Bhaisha^ya- 
ra^a,  it  is  this  which  is  apt  to  meet  with  no  acceptance 
with  everybody,  to  find  no  belief  with  everybody. 
This,  indeed,  Bhaisha^yara^a,  is  the  transcendent 
spiritual  esoteric  lore  of  the  law,  preserved  by  the 
power  of  the  Tathagatas,  but  never  divulged ;  it  is 
an  article  (of  creed)  ^  not  yet  made  known.  By  the 
majority  of  people,  Bhaisha^arafa,  this  Dharmapar- 
y^ya  is  rejected  during  the  lifetime  of  the  Tathagata  ; 
in  far  higher  degree  such  will  be  the  case  after  his 
complete  extinction. 

Nevertheless,  Bhaisha^yara^^a,  one  has  to  consider 
those  young  men  or  young  ladies  of  good  family  to 
be  invested  with  the  robes  of  the  Tathagata  ;  to  be 
regarded  and  blessed  by  the  Tathagatas  living  in 
other  worlds,  that  they  shall  have  the  force  of  indi- 
vidual persuasion,  the  force  that  is  rooted  in  virtue, 

the  exemplary  preachers  who  are  likened  to  the  Tathagata,  and 
sent  by  him  (Tathagata-bhiata  and  Tathagata-duta),  spoken  of 
in  the  preceding  verses  as  well  as  in  the  prose  passages  above. 
Instead  of  models,  I  have  used  the  phrase,  objects  of  veneration, 
for  clearness  sake.  Burnouf  s  original  rendering  '  images '  is,  so 
far  as  I  can  see,  preferable  to  his  correction  of  it  into  '  books.' 
There  is  no  question  of  books,  only  of  a  single  work,  the  Lotus  ; 
and  it  is  clear  that  we  must  try  to  make  the  contents  of  the  last 
two  stanzas  agree  with  the  final  part  of  the  preceding  prose. 
^  Or  point  of  view,  standpoint. 


2  20  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARlKA.  X. 

and  the  force  of  a  pious  vow.  They  shall  dwell 
apart  in  the  convents  of  the  Tathagata,  Bhaisha- 
^ara^a,  and  shall  have  their  heads  stroked  by  the 
hand  of  the  Tathdgata,  those  young  men  and  young 
ladies  of  good  family,  who  after  the  complete  extinc- 
tion of  the  Tathagata  shall  believe,  read,  write,  honour 
this  Dharmapary^ya  and  recite  it  to  others. 

Again,  Bhaisha^yar^^a,  on  any  spot  of  the  earth 
where  this  Dharmaparyaya  is  expounded,  preached, 
written,  studied,  or  recited  in  chorus,  on  that  spot, 
Bhaisha^-ara^a,  one  should  build  a  Tathagata- 
shrine,  magnificent,  consisting  of  precious  substances, 
high,  and  spacious  ;  but  it  is  not  necessary  to  depose  in 
it  relics  of  the  Tathagata.  For  the  body  of  the  Tatha- 
gata is,  so  to  say,  collectively  deposited  there.  Any 
spot  of  the  earth  where  this  Dharmaparyaya  is  ex- 
pounded or  taught  or  recited  or  rehearsed  in  chorus 
or  written  or  kept  in  a  volume,  must  be  honoured, 
respected,  revered,  worshipped  as  if  it  were  a  Stupa, 
with  all  sorts  of  flowers,  incense,  perfumes,  garlands, 
ointment,  powder,  clothes,  umbrellas,  flags,  banners, 
triumphal  streamers,  with  all  kinds  of  song,  music, 
dancing,  musical  instruments,  castanets  ^,  and  shouts 
in  chorus.  And  those,  Bhaisha^yara^a,  who  approach 
a  Tathagata-shrine  to  salute  or  see  it,  must 'be  held 
to  be  near  supreme  and  perfect  enlightenment.  For, 
Bhaisha^yara^'a,  there  are  many  laymen  as  well  as 
priests  who  observe  the  course  of  a  Bodhisattva 
without,  however,  coming  so  far  as  to  see,  hear, 
write  or  worship  this  Dharmaparyaya,  So  long  as 
they  do  not  hear  this  Dharmaparyaya,  they  are  not 
yet  proficient  in  the  course  of  a  Bodhisattva.     But 

*  Ta(/ava/^ara. 


X.  THE    PREACHER.  22  1 

those  who  hear  this  Dharmaparyaya  and  thereupon 
accept,  penetrate,  understand,  comprehend  it,  are  at 
the  time  near  supreme,  perfect  enhghtenment,  so  to 
say,  immediately  near  it. 

It  is  a  case,  Bhaisha^yard^a,  similar  to  that  of  a 
certain  man,  who  in  need  and  in  quest  of  water,  in 
order  to  get  water,  causes  a  well  to  be  dug  in  an  arid 
tract  of  land.  So  long  as  he  sees  that  the  sand 
being  dug  out  is  dry  and  white,  he  thinks:  the  water 
is  still  far  off.  After  some  time  he  sees  that  the  sand 
being  dug  out  is  moist,  mixed  with  water,  muddy, 
with  trickling  drops,  and  that  the  working  men  who 
are  engaged  in  digging  the  well  are  bespattered 
with  mire  and  mud.  On  seeing  that  foretoken, 
Bhaisha^ara^a,  the  man  will  be  convinced  and 
certain  that  water  is  near.  In  the  same  manner, 
Bhaisha^yara^a,  will  these  Bodhisattvas  Mahasattvas 
be  far  away  from  supreme  and  perfect  enlightenment 
so  long  as  they  do  not  hear,  nor  catch,  nor  penetrate, 
nor  fathom,  nor  mind  this  Dharmaparyaya.  But 
when  the  Bodhisattvas  Mahasattvas  shall  hear, 
catch,  penetrate,  study,  and  mind  this  Dharmapar- 
yaya, then,  Bhaisha^yara^a,  they  will  be,  so  to  say, 
immediately  near  supreme,  perfect  enlightenment. 
From  this  Dharmaparyaya,  Bhaisha^yarafa,  will  ac- 
crue to  creatures  supreme  and  perfect  enlightenment. 
For  this  Dharmaparyaya  contains  an  explanation  of 
the  highest  mystery,  the  secret  article^  of  the  law 
which  the  Tathagatas,  &c.,  have  revealed  for  the 
perfecting  of  the  Bodhisattvas  Mahasattvas.  Any 
Bodhisattva,  Bhaisha^yara^a,  who  is  startled,  feels 
anxiety,    gets    frightened   at    this    Dharmaparyaya, 

^  Or  point. 


222  SADDHARMA-PUA^ZJARIKA.  X. 


may  be  held,  Bhaishaf  yari^a,  to  have  (but)  newly 
entered  the  vehicle  ^  If,  however,  a  votary  of  the 
vehicle  of  the  disciples  is  startled,  feels  anxiety,  gets 
frightened  at  this  Dharmaparyaya,  such  a  person,  de- 
voted to  the  vehicle  of  the  disciples,  Bhaisha^yara^a, 
may  be  deemed  a  conceited  man. 

Any  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva,  Bhaisha^^ard^a, 
who  after  the  complete  extinction  of  the  Tathagata, 
in  the  last  times,  the  last  period  shall  set  forth  this 
Dharmaparyaya  to  the  four  classes  of  hearers, 
should  do  so,  Bhaisha^yard^a,  after  having  entered 
the  abode  ^  of  the  Tathagata,  after  having  put  on  the 
robe  of  the  Tathagata,  and  occupied  the  pulpit  of  the 
Tathagata.  And  what  is  the  abode  of  the  Tathdgata, 
Bhaisha^ari^a  ?  It  is  the  abiding  ^  in  charity  (or 
kindness)  to  all  beings;  that  is  the  abode  of  the 
Tathagata,  Bhaisha^yard^a,  which  the  young  man  of 
good  family  has  to  enter.  And  what  is  the  robe  of 
the  Tathagata,  Bhaisha^yara^a  ?  It  is  the  apparel  of 
sublime  forbearance  ;  that  is  the  robe  of  the  Tatha- 
gata, Bhaisha^yaricra,  which  the  young  man  of  good 
family  has  to  put  on.  What  is  the  pulpit  of  the 
Tathagata,  Bhaisha^yara^a  ?  It  is  the  entering  into 
the  voidness  (or  complete  abstraction)  of  all  laws  (or 
things) ;  that  is  the  pulpit,  Bhaisha^ardfa,  on  which 
the  young  man  of  good  family  has  to  sit  in  order  to 
set  forth  this  Dharmaparyaya  to  the  four  classes  of 
hearers.  A  Bodhisattva  ought  to  propound  this 
Dharmaparyaya  with  unshrinking  mind,  before  the 
face  of  the  congregated  Bodhisattvas,  the  four  classes 

^  The  Mahayana,  apparently. 

^  Layana,  recess,  retreat,  refuge,  cell,  lair,  stronghold,  asylum, 
abode. 

^  Vihara,  both  walk  and  abode,  and  further,  monastery. 


X.  THE    PREACHER.  223 

of  hearers,  who  are  striving  for  the  vehicle  of  Bodhi- 
sattvas,  and  I,  staying  in  another  world,  Bhaisha^ya- 
ri^a,  will  by  means  of  fictious  creatures^  make  the 
minds  of  the  whole  congregation  favourably  disposed 
to  that  young  man  of  good  family,  and  I  will  send 
fictious  monks,  nuns,  male  and  female  lay  devotees 
in  order  to  hear  the  sermon  of  the  preacher,  who 
are  unable  to  gainsay  or  contradict  him  ^.  If  after- 
wards he  shall  have  retired  to  the  forest,  I  will  send 
thither  many  gods,  Nagas,  goblins,  Gandharvas, 
demons,  Garu^as,  Kinnaras,  and  great  serpents  to 
hear  him  preach,  while  I,  staying  in  another  world, 
Bhaisha^ara^a,  will  show  my  face  to  that  young 
man  of  good  family,  and  the  words  and  syllables 
of  this  Dharmaparyaya  which  he  happens  to  have 
forgotten  will  I  again  suggest  to  him^  when  he 
repeats  his  lesson. 

And  on  that  occasion  the  Lord  uttered  the  fol- 
lowing stanzas : 

t6.  Let  one  listen  to  this  exalted  Siitra,  avoiding 
all  distractedness  ;  for  rare  is  the  occasion  (given)  for 
hearing  it,  and  rare  also  the  belief  in  it. 


^  Nirmitai^;  the  word  is  masculine,  as  appears  from  the 
sequel. 

^  I  cannot  tell  what  real  phenomena  are  underlying  these  crea- 
tions of  the  Buddha  after  his  Nirva«a ;  but  this  much  seems  clear, 
that  we  have  in  this  piece  a  description  of  the  practical  course 
a  young  preacher  has  to  go  through  in  order  to  become  fit  for 
his  task. 

^  Pratyu^^arayishyami,  literally,  I  will  cause  him  to  re-utter. 
The  real  purport,  unless  I  am  much  mistaken,  is  :  on  a  following 
day  (Buddha)  will  restore  what  the  student  has  forgotten  from  his 
lesson,  provided  he  reads  the  passage  again ;  or,  if  we  take  the 
words  in  a  spiritual  sense,  the  mental  light  of  the  student  will  again 
supply  what  he  has  forgotten  of  his  lesson,     Cf.  stanza  31. 


A 


224  SADDHARMA-PUA-DARIKA.  X. 

17.  It  is  a  case  similar  to  that  of  a  certain  man 
who  in  want  of  water  goes  to  dig  a  well  in  an  arid 
tract  of  land,  and  sees  how  again  and  again  only  dry 
sand  is  being  dug  up. 

18.  On  seeinof  which  he  thinks  :  the  water  is  far 
off;  a  token  of  its  being  far  off  is  the  dry  white 
sand  which  appears  in  digging. 

19.  But  when  he  (afterwards)  sees  again  and  again 
the  sand  moist  and  smooth,  he  gets  the  conviction 
that  water  cannot  be  very  far  off 

20.  So,  too,  are  those  men  far  from  Buddha- 
knowledee  who  have  not  heard  this  Statra  and  have 
failed  to  repeatedly  meditate  on  it. 

21.  But  those  who  have  heard  and  oft  meditated 
on  this  profound  king  amongst  Statras,  this  authorita- 
tive book  ^  for  disciples, 

22.  Are  wise  and  near  Buddha-knowledge,  even 
as  from  the  moisture  of  sand  may  be  inferred  that 
water  is  near. 

23.  After  entering  the  abode  of  the  G'ma.,  putting 
on  his  robe  and  sitting  down  on  my  seat,  the 
preacher  should,  undaunted,  expound  this  Sutra. 

24.  The  strength  of  charity  (or  kindness)  is  my 
abode ;  the  apparel  of  forbearence  is  my  robe  ;  and 
voidness  (or  complete  abstraction)  is  my  seat ;  let 
(the  preacher)  take  his  stand  on  this  and  preach. 

25.  Where  clods,  sticks,  pikes,  or  abusive  words 
and  threats  fall  to  the  lot  of  the  preacher,  let  him 
be  patient,  thinking  of  me. 

26.  My  body  has  existed  entire  in  thousands  of 


^  ViniJ^aya,  decision,  here  hardly  differing  from  tantra  or 
siddhanta.  After  the  model  of  the  latter  has  been  framed  the 
term  Siitranta ;  and  the  Lotus,  as  we  know,  is  a  Sutranta. 


X.  THE    PREACHER.  225 

ko/is  of  regions  ;  during  a  number  of  ko^is  of  ^ons 
beyond  comprehension  I  teach  the  law  to  creatures. 

27.  To  that  courageous  man  who  shall  proclaim 
this  Siatra  after  my  complete  extinction  I  will  also 
send  many  creations  ^ 

28.  Monks,  nuns,  lay  devotees,  male  and  female, 
will  honour  him  as  well  as  the  classes  of  the 
audience. 

29.  And  should  there  be  some  to  attack  him  with 
clods,  sticks,  injurious  words,  threats,  taunts,  then 
the  creations  shall  defend  him. 

30.  And  when  he  shall  stay  alone,  engaged  in 
study,  in  a  lonely  place,  in  the  forest  or  the  hills, 

31.  Then  will  I  show  him  my  luminous  body  and 
enable  him  to  remember  the  lesson  he  forgot  ^. 

32.  While  he  is  living  lonely  in  the  wilderness,  I 
will  send  him  gods  and  goblins  in  great  number  to 
keep  him  company. 

2,3.  Such  are  the  advantages  he  is  to  enjoy ; 
whether  he  is  preaching  to  the  four  classes,  or  living, 
a  solitary,  in  mountain  caverns  and  studying  his 
lesson,  he  will  see  me. 

34.  His  readiness  of  speech  knows  no  impedi- 
ment ;  he  understands  the  manifold  requisites  of 
exegesis ;  he  satisfies  thousands  of  ko/'is  of  be'ngs 
because  he  is,  so  to  say,  inspired  (or  blessed)  by  the 
Buddha  K 


^  Bahunirmitan.  As  a  class  of  angels  is  called  Parinirmita 
Vajavartin,  it  may  be  that  the  idea  the  word  nirmita  was  intended 
to  convey  to  the  simple-minded  is  that  of  angels. 

^  Here  the  Buddha  seems  to  be  the  personification  of  the  faculty 
of  memory,  of  mental  light. 

^  Buddhena.  Burnouf  seems  to  have  read  Buddhai/2.  ihe 
plural. 

[21]  Q 


226  SADDHARMA-PUiVZ)ARiKA.  X. 

35.  And  the  creatures  who  are  entrusted  to  his 
care  shall  very  soon  all  become  Bodhisattvas,  and 
by  cultivating  his  intimacy  they  shall  behold  Bud- 
dhas  as  numerous  as  the  sands  of  the  Ganges. 


XI.  APPARITION    OF    A    STUPA.  227 


CHAPTER   XI. 


APPARITION    OF    A    STUPA. 


Then  there  arose  a  Stupa,  consisting  of  seven 
precious  substances,  from  the  place  of  the  earth  op- 
posite the  Lord,  the  assembly  being  in  the  middle  ^, 
a  Sttipa  five  hundred  yo^anas  in  height  and  pro- 
portionate in  circumference.  After  its  rising,  the 
Stupa,  a  meteoric  phenomenon  ^,  stood  in  the  sky 
sparkling,  beautiful,  nicely  decorated  with  five  thou- 
sand ^  successive  terraces  of  flowers  ^  adorned 
with  many  thousands  of  arches,  embellished  by 
thousands  of  banners  and  triumphal  streamers,  hung 
with  thousands  of  jewel-garlands  and  with  hour- 
plates  and  bells,  and  emitting  the  scent  of  Xan- 
thochymus  and  sandal,  which  scent  filled  this  whole 
world.  Its  row  of  umbrellas  rose  so  far  on  high  as 
to  touch   the   abodes  of  the  four  guardians  of  the 

^  Between  the  Lord  (i.  e.  the  Sun)  and  the  Stupa  of  seven 
Ratnas,  i.  e.  here,  it  would  seem,  the  rainbow  of  seven  colours. 
We  shall  see  that  the  Stupa  has  also  another  function,  that  of 
symbolising  the  celestial  dhish«ya  in  which  sun  and  moon  are 
standing.     Cf.  E.  Senart,  Essai  sur  la  Idgende  du  Buddha,  p.  436. 

"^  Vaihayasam,  in  the  neuter  gender,  whereas  stupa  is 
masculine. 

*  The  number  of  colours  is  now  five,  the  a  seven.  Moreover 
there  ought  to  be  a  parallelism  between  the  five  colours  and  the 
five  planets,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  between  the  seven  ratnas, 
or  colours,  and  the  grahas,  including  sun  and  moon.  In  Rig- 
veda  we  find  saptarajmi  and  pafi/^ara^mi. 

*  Pushpagrahawivedika. 

Q  2 


228  SADDIIARMA-PUiVDARtKA.  XI. 

horizon  and  the  gods.  It  consisted  of  seven  precious 
substances,  viz.  gold,  silver,  lapis  lazuli,  Musaragalva, 
emerald,  red  coral,  and  Karketana-stone  \  This 
Stiipa  of  precious  substances  once  formed,  the  gods 
of  paradise  strewed  and  covered  it  with  Mandarava 
and  great  Mandara  flowers  ^.  And  from  that  Stiipa 
of  precious  substances  there  issued  this  voice  :  Ex- 
cellent, excellent.  Lord  6akyamuni !  thou  hast  well 
expounded  this  Dharmaparyaya  of  the  Lotus  of  the 
True  Law.     So  it  is.  Lord ;  so  it  is,  Sugata. 

At  the  sight  of  that  great  Stupa  of  precious  sub- 
stances, that  meteoric  phenomenon  in  the  sky,  the 
four  classes  of  hearers  were  filled  with  gladness, 
delight,  satisfaction  and  joy.  Instantly  they  rose 
from  their  seats,  stretched  out  their  joined  hands,  and 
remained  standing  in  that  position.  Then  the  Bodhi- 
sattva  Mahasattva  Mahapratibhana,  perceiving  the 
world,  including  gods,  men,  and  demons,  filled  with 
curiosity,  said  to  the  Lord :  O  Lord,  what  is  the 
cause,  what  is  the  reason  of  so  magnificent  a  Sttjpa 
of  precious  substances  appearing  in  the  world  ?  Who 
is  it,  O  Lord,  who  causes  that  sound  to  go  out  from 
the  magnificent  Stdpa  of  precious  substances  ?  Thus 
asked,  the  Lord  spake  to  Mahapratibhana,  the  Bodhi- 
sattva  Mahasattva,  as  follows :  In  this  great  Stupa 
of  precious  substances,  Mahapratibhana,  the  proper 
body  ^  of  the  Tathagata  is  contained  condensed  ;  his 
is  the  St<ipa ;  it  is  he  who  causes  this  sound  to  go  out. 


^  The  raising  of  a  seven-jewelled  Stiapa  is  also  narrated  in  the 
Vinaya  Pi/aka  of  the  Mahasahghika  school,  according  to  Beal  in  the 
Indian  Antiquary,  vol.  xi,  p.  47.  The  particulars  of  the  description 
in  that  narrative  bear  little  resemblance  to  those  found  in  our  text. 

"^  There  fell  smaller  and  bigger  drops  of  rain. 

^  Atmabhava,  also  the  very  nature,  the  essential  being. 


XI.  APPARITION    OF    A    StCpA.  2  29 

In  the  point  of  space  below,  Mahapratibhana,  there 
are  innumerable  thousands  of  worlds  \  Further  on 
is  the  world  called  Ratnavi^uddha  ^  there  is  the 
Tathagata  named  Prabhutaratna,  the  Arhat,  &c. 
This  Lord  of  yore  made  this  vow  :  Formerly,  when 
following  the  course  of  a  Bodhisattva,  I  have  not 
arrived  at  supreme,  perfect  enlightenment  before  I 
had  heard  this  Dharmaparyaya  of  the  Lotus  of  the 
True  Law,  serving  for  the  instruction  of  Bodhi- 
sattvas.  But  from  the  moment  that  I  had  heard 
this  Dharmaparyaya  of  the  Lotus  of  the  True  Law, 
I  have  become  fully  ripe  for  supreme,  perfect 
enlightenment.  Now,  Mahapratibhana,  that  Lord 
Prabhutaratna,  the  Tathagata,  &c.,  at  the  juncture  of 
time  when  his  complete  extinction  was  to  take  place, 
announced  in  presence  of  the  world,  including  the 
gods  :  After  my  complete  extinction,  monks,  one 
Sttjpa  must  be  made  of  precious  substances  of  this 
frame  (or  form)  of  the  proper  body  of  the  Tatha- 
gata^; the  other  Stupas,  again,  should  be  made 
in  dedication  (or  in  reference)  to  me.  Thereupon, 
Mahapratibhana,  the  Lord  Prabhutaratna,  the  Tatha- 
gata, &c.,  pronounced  this  blessing:  Let  my  Stupa 
here,  this  Stupa  of  my  proper  bodily  frame  (or  form), 
arise  wherever  in  any  Buddha-field  in  the  ten  direc- 
tions of  space,  in  all  worlds,  the  Dharmaparyaya  of 
the  Lotus  of  the  True  Law  is  propounded,  and  let 


^  Var.  lect.  innumerable  hundred  thousand  myriads  of  ko/is  of 
worlds. 

"^  I.  e.  clear  by  jewels  (stars),  or,  quite  the  reverse,  cleared  from 
jewels.  Most  probably,  however,  we  have  to  take  it  in  the  former 
sense.  The  world  so  called  is,  apparently,  the  starry  vault,  beyond 
the  atmosphere  where  the  rainbow  is  glittering. 

^  Asya  Tathagatatmabhavavigrahasya. 


230  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  XT. 

it  Stand  in  the  sky  above  the  assembled  congrega- 
tion when  this  Dharmaparyaya  of  the  Lotus  of  the 
True  Law  is  being  preached  by  some  Lord  Buddha 
or  another,  and  let  this  Sttapa  of  the  frame  (or  form) 
of  my  proper  body  give  a  shout  of  applause  to  those 
Buddhas  while  preaching  this  Dharmaparyaya  of 
the  Lotus  of  the  True  Law\  It  is  that  Stiipa, 
Mahapratibhana,  of  the  relics  of  the  Lord  Prabhu- 
taratna,  the  Tathagata,  &c.,  which,  while  I  was 
preaching  this  Dharmaparyaya  of  the  Lotus  of  the 
True  Law  in  this  Saha-world,  arose  above  this 
assembled  congregation  and,  standing  as  a  meteor 
in  the  sky,  gave  its  applause. 

Then  said  Mahapratibhana,  the  Bodhisattva  Maha- 
sattva,  to  the  Lord:  Show  us,  O  Lord,  through  thy 
power  the  frame  of  the  afore-mentioned  Tathagata. 
Whereon  the  Lord  spake  to  the  Bodhisattva  Maha- 
sattva  Mahapratibhana  as  follows :  This  Lord  Pra- 
bhutaratna,  Mahapratibhana,  has  made  a  grave  and 
pious  vow.  That  vow  consisted  in  this :  When  the 
Lords,  the  Buddhas,  being  in  other  Buddha-fields, 
shall  preach  this  Dharmaparyaya  of  the  Lotus  of  the 

'  We  shall  see  that  the  '  extinct  Lord  Prabhutaratna '  is  to  sit 
in  the  middle  of  the  Stupa  along  with  the  Buddha.  The  moon  is 
'  completely  extinct '  when  in  conjunction  with  the  sun,  and 
it  seems  sufficiently  clear  that  Prabhutaratna,  the  Tathagata,  the 
Arhat,  &c.,  is  the  moon  at  the  time  of  amavasya,  conjunction. 
The  Stupa,  in  the  centre  of  which  sun  and  moon  are  sitting 
together  at  that  period,  cannot  be  the  rainbow,  so  that  we  have 
in  the  sequel  again  to  take  Stupa  in  the  sense  of  dhish«ya, 
asterism;  see  note  i,p.  227.  The  crescent  surmounting  the  Stupa- 
symbols  on  coins  (see  Senart,  1.  c.)  is  not  exactly  the  representa- 
tion of  the  '  extinct  Lord ' — who  is  difficult  to  be  represented — but 
of  the  same  nature.  The  appearance  of  this  symbol  on  those 
coins  is  by  itself  sufficient  to  show  the  high  antiquity  of  a  refined 
nature-worship  in  Buddhism. 


A 


XL  APPARITION    OF    A    STUPA.  23 1 

True  Law,  then  let  this  StCipa  of  the  frame  of  my 
proper  body  be  near  the  Tathagata^  to  hear  from 
him  this  Dharmaparyaya  of  the  Lotus  of  the  True 
Law.  And  when  those  Lords,  those  Buddhas  wish  to 
uncover  the  frame  of  my  proper  body  and  show  it 
to  the  four  classes  of  hearers,  let  then  the  Tatha- 
gata-frames,  made  by  the  Tathagatas  in  all  quarters, 
in  different  Buddha-fields,  from  their  own  proper 
body,  and  preaching  the  law  to  creatures,  under 
different  names  in  several  Buddha-fields,  let  all  those 
Tathagata-frames,  made  from  the  proper  body,  united 
together,  along  with  this  Stupa  containing  the  frame 
of  my  own  body,  be  opened  and  shown  to  the  four 
classes  of  hearers.  Therefore,  Mahapratibhana,  have 
I  made  many  Tathagata-frames  ^  which  in  all  quarters, 
in  several  Buddha-fields  in  thousands  of  worlds, 
preach  the  law  to  creatures.  All  those  ought  to  be 
brought  hither. 

Thereupon  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Maha- 
pratibhana said  to  the  Lord  :  Then,  O  Lord,  shall 
we  reverentially  salute  all  those  bodily  emanations 
of  the  Tathagata  and  created  by  the  Tathagata. 

And  instantly  the  Lord  darted  from  the  circle  of 
hair  on  his  brow  a  ray,  which  was  no  sooner  darted 
than  the  Lords,  the  Buddhas  stationed  in  the  east  in 
fifty  hundred  thousand  myriads  of  ko/is  of  worlds, 
equal  to  the  sands  of  the  river  Ganges,  became  all  visi- 
ble, and  the  Buddha-fields  there,  consisting  of  crystal, 
became  visible,  variegated  with  jewel  trees,  decorated 


'  The  place  of  the  moon  just  before  entering  Nirvana  must  of 
course  be  near  the  sun's  seat  of  the  law. 

"^  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  remark  that  by  the  luminous  bodies, 
the  attendants  of  Prabhfttaratna,  i.  e.  the  stars,  are  meant. 


232  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  XL 

with  Strings  of  fine  cloth,  replete  with  many  hundred 
thousands  of  Bodhisattvas,  covered  with  canopies, 
decked  with  a  network  of  seven  precious  substances 
and  gold  \  And  in  those  fields  appeared  the  Lords, 
the  Buddhas,  teaching  with  sweet  and  gentle  voice  the 
law  to  creatures ;  and  those  Buddha-fields  seemed 
replete  with  hundred  thousands  of  Bodhisattvas. 
So,  too,  it  was  in  the  south-east;  so  in  the  south; 
so  in  the  south-west ;  so  in  the  west ;  so  in  the 
north-west ;  so  in  the  north  ;  so  in  the  north-east ; 
so  in  the  nadir ;  so  in  the  zenith  ;  so  in  the  ten 
directions  of  space ;  in  each  direction  were  to  b& 
seen  many  hundred  thousand  myriads  of  ko/is  of 
Buddha-fields,  similar  to  the  sands  of  the  river 
Ganges,  in  many  worlds  similar  to  the  sands  of  the 
river  Ganges,  Lords  Buddhas  in  many  hundred 
thousand  myriads  of  ko/is  of  Buddha-fields. 

Those  Tathagatas,  &c.,  in  the  ten  directions  of 
space  then  addressed  each  his  own  troop  of  Bodhi- 
sattvas :  We  shall  have  to  go,  young  men  of  good 
family,  to  the  Saha-world  near  the  Lord  ^'akyamuni, 
the  Tathagata,  &c.,  to  humbly  salute  the  Sttapa 
of  the  relics  of  Prabhtataratna,  the  Tathagata,  &c. 
Thereupon  those  Lords,  those  Buddhas  resorted  with 
their  own  satellites,  each  with  one  or  two,  to  this 
Saha-world.  At  that  period  this  all-embracing  world 
was  adorned  with  jewel  trees ;  it  consisted  of  lapis 
lazuli,  was  covered  with  a  network  of  seven  precious 
substances  and  gold,  smoking  with  the  odorous 
incense  of  magnificent  jewels,  everywhere  strewn 
with    Mandarava    and    great    Mandarava    flowers, 

^  Here  we  see  that  gold  does  not  belong  to  the  seven  ratnas. 
The  whole  list  of  the  seven  colours  seems  to  have  undergone 
some  alterations. 


XI.  APPARITION    OF   A    StOpA.  233 

decorated  with  a  network  of  little  bells  \  showing  a 
checker  board  divided  by  gold  threads  into  eight 
compartments,  devoid  of  villages,  towns,  boroughs, 
provinces,  kingdoms,  and  royal  capitals,  without 
Kala-mountain,  without  the  mountains  Mu/^ilinda 
and  great  Mu/^Ilinda,  without  a  mount  Sumeru, 
without  a  iTakravala  (i.  e.  horizon)  and  great  A'akra- 
vala  (i.  e.  extended  horizon),  without  other  principal 
mountains,  without  great  oceans,  without  rivers 
and  great  rivers,  without  bodies  of  gods,  men,  and 
demons,  without  hells,  without  brute  creation,  with- 
out a  kingdom  of  Yama.  For  it  must  be  understood 
that  at  that  period  all  beings  in  any  of  the  six  states 
of  existence  in  this  world  had  been  removed  to 
other  worlds,  with  the  exception  of  those  who  were 
assembled  at  that  congregation  ^.  Then  it  was  that 
those  Lords,  those  Buddhas,  attended  by  one  or  two 
satellites,  arrived  at  this  Saha-world  and  went  one 
after  the  other  to  occupy  their  place  close  to  the 
foot  of  a  jewel  tree.  Each  of  the  jewel  trees  was 
five  hundred  yo^anas  in  height,  had  boughs,  leaves, 
foliage,  and  circumference  in  proportion  ^,  and  was 
provided  with  blossoms  and  fruits.  At  the  foot  of 
each  jewel  tree  stood  prepared  a  throne,  five  yo^anas 
in  height,  and  adorned  with  magnificent  jewels.  Each 
Tathagata  went  to  occupy  his  throne  and  sat  on  it 
cross-legged.  And  so  all  the  Tathagatas  of  the  whole 
sphere  sat  cross-legged  at  the  foot  of  the  jewel  trees. 

^  Kahkawi^alalahkrz'ta. 

^  The  hells  at  least,  which  are  places  of  darkness,  could  not  be 
present  when  the  stars  are  shining  brightly. 

^  My  MSS.  read  pan/^ayo^ana^atany  u/^/'aistvenabhut,  anupurva- 
jakhapatrapalajapariwaha/^.  In  the  sequel  we  meet  with  another 
reading  agreeing  with  Burnoufs. 


2  34  SADDHARMA-PUJV^DARtKA.  XL 

At  that  moment  the  whole  sphere  was  replete 
with  Tathagatas,  but  the  beings  produced  from  the 
proper  body  of  the  Lord  6akyamuni  had  not  yet 
arrived,  not  even  from  a  single  point  of  the  horizon. 
Then  the  Lord  ^'akyamuni,  the  Tathagata,  &c.,  pro- 
ceeded to  make  room  for  those  Tathagata-frames 
that  were  arriving  one  after  the  other.  On  every 
side  in  the  eight  directions  of  space  (appeared) 
twenty  hundred  thousand  myriads  of  ko/is  of  Bud- 
dha-fields of  lapis  lazuli,  decked  with  a  network  of 
seven  precious  substances  and  gold,  decorated  with 
a  fringe  of  little  bells,  strewn  with  Mandirava  and 
great  Mandarava  flowers,  covered  with  heavenly 
awnings,  hung  with  wreaths  of  heavenly  flowers, 
smoking  with  heavenly  odorous  incense.  All  those 
twenty  hundred  thousand  myriads  of  ko/is  of  Bud- 
dha-fields were  without  villages,  towns,  boroughs, 
&c, ;  without  Kala-mountain,  &c. ;  without  great 
oceans,  &c. ;  without  bodies  of  gods,  &c.  All  those 
Buddha-fields  were  so  arranged  by  him  as  to  form 
one  Buddha-field,  one  soil,  even,  lovely,  set  ofl"  with 
trees  of  seven  precious  substances,  trees  five  hun- 
dred yo^anas  in  height  and  circumference,  provided 
with  boughs,  flowers,  and  fruits  in  proportion  \  At 
the  foot  of  each  tree  stood  prepared  a  throne,  five 
yoj^anas  in  height  and  width,  consisting  of  celestial 
gems,  glittering  and  beautiful.  The  Tathagatas 
arriving  one  after  the  other  occupied  the  throne 
near  the  foot  of  each  tree,  and  sat  cross-legged.  In 
like  manner  the  Tathagata  6akyamuni  prepared 
twenty  hundred  thousand  myriads  of  ko^is  of  other 


^  The  reading  is  somewhat  doubtful :    arohapariwahonupurva- 
(var.  lect.  °h3./i,  anupurva-)jakhapatrapushpaphalopeta(/^). 


XL  APPARITION    OF    A    ST^PA.  235 

worlds,  in  every  direction  of  space,  in  order  to  give 
room  to  the  Tathagatas  who  were  arriving  one  after 
the  other.  Those  twenty  hundred  thousand  myriads 
of  ko/is  of  worlds  in  every  direction  of  space  were 
likewise  so  made  by  him  as  to  be  without  villages, 
towns,  &c.  [as  above].  They  were  without  bodies 
of  gods,  &c.  [as  above];  all  those  beings  had  been 
removed  to  other  worlds.  These  Buddha-fields  also 
were  of  lapis  lazuli,  &c.  [as  above].  All  those 
jewel  trees  measured  five  hundred  yq^anas,  and  near 
them  were  thrones,  artificially  made  and  measuring 
five  yo^anas.  Then  those  Tathagatas  sat  down 
cross-legged,  each  on  a  throne  at  the  foot  of  a 
jewel  tree. 

At  that  moment  the  Tathagatas  produced  by  the 
Lord  6akyamuni,  who  in  the  east  were  preaching  the 
law  to  creatures  in  hundred  thousands  of  myriads  of 
ko/is  of  Buddha-fields,  similar  to  the  sands  of  the  river 
Ganges,  all  arrived  from  the  ten  points  of  space  and 
sat  down  in  the  eight  quarters.  Thereupon  thirty 
ko/is  of  worlds  in  each  direction  were  occupied^  by 
those  Tathagatas  from  all  the  eight  quarters.  Then, 
seated  on  their  thrones,  those  Tathagatas  deputed 
their  satellites  into  the  presence  of  the  Lord  6akya- 
muni,  and  after  giving  them  bags  with  jewel  flowers 
enjoined  them  thus:  Go,  young  men  of  good  family, 
to  the  Gr/dhrak<i/a  mountain,  where  the  Lord  .5a- 
kyamuni,  the  Tathagata,  &c.,  is  ;  salute  him  reveren- 
tially and  ask,  in  our  name,  after  the  state  of  health, 
well-being,  lustiness,  and  comfort  both  of  himself 
and  the  crowd  of  Bodhisattvas  and  disciples.     Strew 

^  Burnouf  seems  to  have  read  atikranta,  for  his  translation  has 
'  franchirent,'  whereas  my  MSS.  have  akranta.  One  of  the  MSS. 
has  lokadhatuko/ibhyo  instead  of  °ko/yo. 


236  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARiKA.  XI. 

him  with  this  heap  of  jewels  and  speak  thus:  Would 
the  Lord  Tathagata  deign  to  open  this  great  Stupa 
of  jewels  ?  It  was  in  this  manner  that  all  those 
Tathagatas  deputed  their  satellites. 

And  when  the  Lord  K^akyamuni,  the  Tathagata, 
perceived  that  his  creations,  none  wanting,  had 
arrived ;  perceived  that  they  were  severally  seated 
on  their  thrones,  and  perceived  that  the  satellites  of 
those  Tathagatas,  &c.,  were  present,  he,  in  considera- 
tion of  the  wish  expressed  by  those  Tathagatas,  &c., 
rose  from  his  seat  and  stood  in  the  sky,  as  a 
meteor.  And  all  the  four  classes  of  the  assembly 
rose  from  their  seats,  stretched  out  their  joined  hands, 
and  stood  gazing  up  to  the  face  of  the  Lord.  The 
Lord  then,  with  the  right  fore-finger  ^  unlocked  the 
middle  of  the  great  Stupa  of  jewels,  which  showed 
like  a  meteor,  and  so  severed  the  two  parts.  Even 
as  the  double  doors  of  a  great  city  gate  separate 
when  the  bolt  is  removed,  so  the  Lord  opened  the 
great  Stlapa,  which  showed  like  a  meteor,  by  un- 
locking it  in  the  middle  with  the  right  fore-finger. 
The  great  Stupa  of  jewels  had  no  sooner  been  opened 
than  the  Lord  Prabhutaratna,  the  Tathagata,  &c., 
was  seen  sitting  cross-legged  on  his  throne,  with 
emaciated  ^  limbs  and  faint  body,  as  if  absorbed  in 
abstract  meditation,  and  he  pronounced  these  words  : 
Excellent,  excellent.  Lord  ^'akyamuni ;  thou  hast 
well  expounded  this  Dharmaparyaya  of  the  Lotus 
of  the  True  Law.  I  repeat,  thou  hast  well  expounded 
this  Dharmaparyaya  of  the  Lotus  of  the  True  Law, 

^  Dakshi»aya  hastangulya. 

'  Pari^ushkagatra,  var.  lect.  parijuddha°,  with  thoroughly 
pure  or  correct  limbs.  Burnouf  had  committed  no  mistake  in  reading 
parijushka°,  though  he  accuses  himself  of  having  done  so. 


XI.  APPARITION    OF    A    StOpA. 


237 


Lord  6'ikyamuni,  to  the  (four)  classes  of  the 
assembly.  I  myself,  Lord,  have  come  hither  to 
hear  the  Dharmaparyaya  of  the  Lotus  of  the  True 
Law. 

Now  the  four  classes  of  the  assembly,  on  per- 
ceiving the  Lord  Prabhtitaratna,  the  Tathagata,  &c., 
who  had  been  extinct  for  many  hundred  thousand 
myriads  of  ko/'is  of  yEons,  speaking  in  this  way, 
were  filled  with  wonder  and  amazement.  Instantly 
they  covered  the  Lord  PrabhCitaratna,  the  Tatha- 
gata,  &c.,  and  the  Lord  .Sakyamuni,  the  Tathdgata, 
&c,,  with  heaps  of  divine  and  human  flowers.  And 
then  the  Lord  PrabhCitaratna,  the  Tathagata,  &c., 
ceded  to  the  Lord  ^'akyamuni,  the  Tathagata,  &c., 
the  half  of  the  seat  on  that  very  throne  within  that 
same  great  Sttipa  of  jewels  and  said  :  Let  the  Lord 
6akyamuni,  the  Tathagata,  &c.,  sit  down  here. 
Whereon  the  Lord  .Sakyamuni,  the  Tathagata,  &c., 
sat  down  upon  that  half-seat  together  with  the  other 
Tathagata,  so  that  both  Tathdgatas  were  seen  as 
meteors  in  the  sky,  sitting  on  the  throne  in  the 
middle  of  the  great  Stftpa  of  jewels. 

And  in  the  minds  of  those  four  classes  of  the 
assembly  rose  this  thought :  We  are  far  off  from 
the  two  Tathagatas  ;  therefore  let  us  also,  through 
the  power  of  the  Tathagata,  rise  up  to  the  sky.  As 
the  Lord  apprehended  in  his  mind  what  was  going 
on  in  the  minds  of  those  four  classes  of  the  as- 
sembly, he  instantly,  by  magic  power,  established 
the  four  classes  as  meteors  in  the  sky.  Thereupon 
the  Lord  ^'akyamuni,  the  Tathigata,  addressed  the 
four  classes  :  Who  amongst  you,  monks,  will  en- 
deavour to  expound  this  Dharmaparyaya  of  the 
Lotus  of  the  True  Law  in  this  Saha-world  ?     The 


238  SADDHARMA-PUiSTDARlKA.  XI. 

fatal  term,  the  time  (of  death),  is  now  at  hand  ;  the 
Tathagata  longs  for  complete  extinction,  monks, 
after  entrusting  to  you  this  Dharmaparyaya  of  the 
Lotus  of  the  True  Law. 

And  on  that  occasion  the  Lord  uttered  the  fol- 
lowing stanzas  : 

1.  Here  you  see,  monks,  the  great  Seer,  the  ex- 
tinct Chief,  within  the  Stupa  of  jewels,  who  now  has 
come  to  hear  the  law.  Who  would  not  call  up  his 
energy  for  the  law's  sake  ? 

2.  Albeit  completely  extinct  for  many  ko/is  of 
^ons,  he  yet  now  comes  to  hear  the  law ;  for  the 
law's  sake  he  moves  hither  and  thither ;  very  rare 
(and  very  precious)  is  a  law  like  this. 

3.  This  Leader  practised  ^  a  vow  when  he  was 
in  a  former  existence ;  even  after  his  complete  ex- 
tinction he  wanders  through  this  whole  world  in  all 
ten  points  of  space. 

4.  And  all  these  (you  here  see)  are  my  proper 
bodies,  by  thousands  of  ko/is,  like  ^  the  sands  of  the 
Ganges ;  they  have  appeared  that  the  law  may  be 
fulfilled  ^  and  in  order  to  see  this  extinct  Master. 

5.  After  laying  out^  for  each  his  peculiar  field,  as 
well  as  having  (created)  all  disciples,  men  and  gods, 
in  order  to  preserve  the  true  law,  as  long  as  the  reign 
of  the  law  shall  last, 

6.  I  have  by  magic  power  cleared  many  worlds. 


^  Nishevita.  ^  Yatha. 

*  Dharmakrz'tyasya  krz'tena,  literally,  for  the  sake  of  the 
task  or  office  of  the  law. 

*  ^^oritva,  Sansk.  ^^uritva  and  k/iovay'itvz,  to  inlay,  make 
inlaid  work,  cut  figures,  fashion,  ^akyamuni  is  most  distinctly 
represented  as  a  creator — in  the  Indian  sense,  of  course — in  the 
same  way  as  Brahma  Hirawyagarbha  is  a  creator. 


XI.  APPARITION    OF    A    STUPA.  239 

destined  as  seats  for  those  Buddhas,  and  transported 
all  creatures. 

7.  It  has  (always)  been  my  anxious  care  how  this 
line  of  the  law  might  be  manifested.  So  (you  see) 
Buddhas  here  in  immense  number  staying  at  the 
foot  of  trees  like  a  great  multitude  of  lotuses. 

8.  Many  ko/is  of  bases  of  trees  are  brightened  by 
the  Leaders  sitting  on  the  thrones  which  are  per- 
petually occupied  by  them  and  brightened  as  dark- 
ness is  by  fire. 

9.  A  delicious  fragrance  spreads  from  the  Leaders 
of  the  world  over  all  quarters,  (a  fragrance)  by  which, 
when  the  wind  is  blowing,  all  these  creatures  are 
intoxicated. 

10.  Let  him  who  after  my  extinction  shall  keep 
this  Dharmaparyaya  quickly  pronounce  his  declara- 
tion in  the  presence  of  the  Lords  of  the  world. 

11.  The  Seer  Prabhutaratna  who,  though  com- 
pletely extinct,  is  awake,  will  hear  the  lion's  roar  of 
him  who  shall  take  this  resolution  ^ 

12.  Myself,  in  the  second  place,  as  well  as  the 
many  Chiefs  who  have  flocked  hither  by  ko/is,  will 
hear  that  resolution  from  the  son  of  Gina.,  who  is  to 
exert  himself  to  expound  this  law. 

13.  And  thereby  shall  I  always  be  honoured  as 
well  as  Prabhutaratna,  the  self-born  6^ina,who  perpe- 
tually wanders  through  the  quarters  and  intermediate 
quarters  in  order  to  hear  such  a  law  as  this. 

14.  And  these  (other)  Lords  of  the  world  here 
present,  by  whom  this  soil  is  so  variegated  and 
splendid,  to  them  also  will  accrue  ample  and  mani- 
fold honour  from  this  Sutra  being  preached. 

*  Vyavasaya. 


240  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARiKA.  XI. 


15.  Here  on  this  seat  you  see  me,  together  with 
the  Lord  next  to  me,  in  the  middle  of  the  Stupa ; 
likewise  many  other  Lords  of  the  world  here  present, 
in  many  hundreds  of  fields. 

16.  Ye,  young  men  of  good  family,  mind,  for 
mercy's  sake  towards  all  beings,  that  it  is  a  very 
difficult  task  to  which  the  Chief  urges  you. 

1 7.  One  might  expound  many  thousands  of  Sutras, 
like  to  the  sands  of  the  Ganges,  without  overmuch 
difficulty. 

18.  One  who  after  grasping  the  Sumeru  in  the 
fist  were  to  hurl  it  a  distance  of  ko/is  of  fields,  would 
do  nothing  very  difficult. 

19.  Nor  would  it  be  so  very  difficult  if  one  could 
shake  this  whole  universe  by  the  thumb  to  hurl  it  a 
distance  of  kofis  of  fields. 

20.  Nor  would  one  who,  after  taking  stand  on  the 
limit  of  the  existing  world,  were  to  expound  the  law 
and  thousands  of  other  Sutras,  do  something  so  very 
difficult. 

21.  But  to  keep  and  preach  this  Sutra  in  the 
dreadful  period  succeeding  the  extinction  of  the 
Chief  of  the  world,  that  is  difficult  \ 

22.  To  throw  down  the  totality  of  ether-element 
after  compressing  it  in  one  fist,  and  to  leave  it 
behind  after  having  thrown  it  away,  is  not  difficult. 

23.  But  to  copy  a  Sutra  like  this  in  the  period 
after  my  extinction,  that  is  difficult 2. 

24.  To  collect  the  whole  earth-element  at  a  nail's 


^  Yet  the  stars  perform  that  extremely  difficult  task  apparently 
with  the  greatest  ease. 

^  Nay,  it  is  impossible,  if  one  does  not  avail  oneself  of  a  lamp  or 
Other  artificial  light. 


A, 


XI.  APPARITION    OF    A    STUPA.  24 1 

end,  cast  it  away,  and  then  walk  off  to  the  Brahma- 
world  \ 

25.  Is  not  difficult,  nor  would  it  require  a  strength 
surpassing  everybody's  strength  to  do  this  work  of 
difficulty. 

26.  Something  more  difficult  than  that  will  he  do 
who  in  the  last  days  after  my  extinction  shall  pro- 
nounce this  Sutra,  were  it  but  a  single  moment. 

27.  It  will  not  be  difficult  for  him  to  walk  in  the 
midst  of  the  conflagration  at  the  (time  of  the)  end 
of  the  world,  even  if  he  carries  with  him  a  load 
of  hay. 

28.  More  difficult  it  will  be  to  keep  this  Sutra 
after  my  extinction  and  teach  it  to  a  single  creature. 

29.  One  may  keep  the  eighty-four  thousand  divi- 
sions  of   the   law  -   and    expound   them,    with    the 


^  Brahmaloka  may  mean  either  one  of  the  twenty  Brahma 
heavens,  or  all  of  them  collectively.  There  are  four  arilpabrah- 
malokas,  and  sixteen  rupabrahmalokas. 

^  Dharmaskandha,  Pali  Dhammakkhandha ;  see  Burnouf, 
Introd.  p.  34  seq. ;  B.  H.  Hodgson,  Essays,  p.  14  ;  Childers,  Pali 
Diet.  p.  117,  where  the  following  definition  is  given:  '  The  Tipi/aka 
is  divided  into  eighty-four  thousand  dhammakkhandhas,  "  articles  " 
or  "  sections  of  the  Law."  They  are  divisions  according  to  sub- 
ject. Buddhaghosa,  as  an  illustration  of  the  meaning  of  this  term, 
says  that  a  Sutta,  or  discourse,  dealing  with  one  subject  forms  one 
dh.,  while  a  Sutta  embracing  several  subjects  forms  several.'  It  is 
worth  while  to  compare  this  number  of  divisions  with  the  eighty- 
four  thousand  monasteries  erected  by  king  Ajoka  in  the  eighty-four 
(thousand)  towns  of  India,  as  we  know  from  the  historical  work 
bipavawsa  VI,  95  seq.,  where  we  read  (according  to  Dr.Oldenberg's 
transl.)  :  '  Full  and  complete  eighty-four  thousand  most  precious 
sections  of  the  Truth  (dhammakkhandha)  have  been  taught  by 
the  most  excellent  Buddha ;  I  will  build  eighty-four  thousand 
monasteries,  honouring  each  single  section  of  the  Truth  by  one 
monastery.' 

[21]  R 


242  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  XI. 


instructions  and  such  as  they  have  been  set  forth,  to 
ko/is  of  hving  beings  ; 

30.  This  is  not  so  difficult ;  nor  is  it,  to  train  at 
the  present  time  monks,  and  confirm  my  disciples  in 
the  five  parts  of  transcendent  knowledge. 

31.  But  more  difficult  is  it  to  keep  this  Statra, 
believe  in  it,  adhere  to  it,  or  expound  it  again  and 
again. 

32.  Even  he  who  confirms  many  thousands  of 
ko/is  of  Arhats,  blest  with  the  possession  of  the 
six  transcendent  faculties  (Abhi^7/as),  like  sands  of 
the  Ganges  \ 

33.  Performs  something  not  so  difficult  by  far  as 
the  excellent  man  does  who  after  my  extinction  shall 
keep  my  sublime  law. 

34.  I  have  often,  in  thousands  of  worlds,  preached 
the  law,  and  to-day  also  I  preach  it  with  the  view 
that  Buddha-knowledge  may  be  obtained. 

35.  This  Sutra  is  declared  the  principal  of  all 
Sutras;  he  who  keeps  in  his  memory  this  Sdtra, 
keeps  the  body  of  the  6^ina. 

36.  Speak,  O  young  men  of  good  family,  while 
the  Tathagata  is  (still)  in  your  presence,  who 
amongst  you  is  to  exert  himself  ^  in  later  times  to 
keep  the  Statra. 

37.  Not  only  I  myself  shall  be  pleased,  but  the 
Lords  of  the  world  in  general,  if  one  would  keep  for 
a  moment  this  Sutra  so  difficult  to  keep. 

38.  Such  a  one  shall  ever  be  praised  by  all  the 
Lords  of  the  world,  famed  as  an  eminent  hero,  and 
quick  in  arriving  at  transcendent  wisdom. 

*  The  latter  half  of  the  stanza  runs  thus :    sha«/abhi^ftamaha- 
bhagan  yatha  Gahgaya  valika. 
^  Or,  shall  be  capable. 


XI.  APPARITION    OF    A    STUPA.  243 

39.  He  shall  be  entrusted  with  the  leadership^ 
amongst  the  sons  of  the  Tathagatas,  he  who,  after 
having  reached  the  stage  of  meekness  ^,  shall  keep 
this  Sutra. 

40.  He  shall  be  the  eye  of  the  world,  including 
gods  and  men,  who  shall  speak  this  Stitra  after  the 
extinction  of  the  Chief  of  men. 

41.  He  is  to  be  venerated  by  all  beings,  the  wise 
man  who  in  the  last  times  shall  preach  this  Sutra 
(were  it  but)  a  single  moment. 

Thereupon  the  Lord  addressed  the  whole  company 
of  Bodhisattvas  and  the  world,  including  gods  and 
demons,  and  said :  Of  yore,  monks,  in  times  past 
I  have,  unwearied  and  without  repose,  sought  after 
the  StJtra  of  the  Lotus  of  the  True  Law,  during  im- 
mense, immeasurable  ^ons ;  many  yEons  before 
I  have  been  a  king,  during  many  thousands  of 
-^ons.  Having  once  taken  the  strong  resolution 
to  arrive  at  supreme,  perfect  enlightenment,  my 
mind  did  not  swerve  from  its  aim.  I  exerted  myself 
to  fulfil  the  six  Perfections  (Paramitas),  bestowing 
immense  alms :  gold,  money,  gems,  pearls,  lapis 
lazuli,  conch-shells,  stones  (?),  coral,  gold  and  silver, 
emerald,  Musaragalva,  red  pearls ;  villages,  towns, 
boroughs,  provinces,  kingdoms,  royal  capitals ;  wives, 
sons,  daughters,  slaves,  male  and  female ;  elephants, 
horses,  cars,  up  to  the  sacrifice  of  life  and  body,  of 
limbs  and  members,  hands,  feet,  head.  And  never 
did  the  thought  of  self-complacency^  rise  in  me.     In 


^  Dhuravaha. 

^  Dantabhumi.     Danta  is  tamed,  subject,  meek;  and  also  a 
young  tamed  bullock. 


^  Agraha/^ittam. 


R  2 


244  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARlKA.  XI. 

those  days  the  Kfe  of  men  lasted  long,  so  that  for  a 
time  of  many  hundred  thousand  years  I  was  exer- 
cising the  rule  of  a  King  of  the  Law  for  the  sake  of 
duty,  not  for  the  sake  of  enjoyment^     After  install- 
ing in  government  the  eldest  prince  royal,  I  went  in 
quest  of  the  best  law  in  the  four  quarters,  and  had 
promulgated  with  sound  of  bell  the  following  pro- 
clamation :  He  who  procures  for  me  the  best  law^  or 
points  out  what  is  useful,  to  him  will  I  become  a 
servant.     At  that  time  there  lived  a  Seer ;  he  told 
me :  Noble  king,  there  is  a  Siltra,  called  the  Lotus 
of  the  True  Law,  which  is  an  exposition  of  the  best 
law.     If  thou  consent  to  become  my  servant,  I  will 
teach  thee  that  law.     And  I,  glad,  content,  exulting 
and  ravished  at  the  words  I  heard  from  the  Seer, 
became  his  pupil ^  and  said:  I  will  do  for  thee  the 
work   of  a  servant.     And  so  having  agreed  upon 
becoming  the  servant  of  the  Seer,  I  performed  the 
duties  of  a  servitor,   such  as   fetching  grass,  fuel, 
water,  bulbs,  roots,  fruit,  &c.     I  held  also  the  office 
of  a  doorkeeper.     When  I  had  done  such  kind  of 
work  at  day-time,  I  at  night  kept  his  feet  while  he 


^  This  golden  age  evidently  coincided  with  the  reign  of  king 
Yima  in  Iran,  of  king  Fr69i  in  Denmark,  of  king  Manu  in 
India ;  in  short,  with  the  dawn  of  humanity. 

^  Or,  the  best  right. 

^  Upeyitavan.  The  original  must  have  had  upeyivan.  The 
whole  story,  so  different  in  language,  style,  phraseology,  choice  of 
words  and  spirit  from  anything  else  in  the  Lotus,  has  been  so 
profoundly  altered  that  almost  every  word  must  be  taken  in 
another  sense  than  what  originally  was  attached  to  it.  I  am  not 
sure  that  those  who  modified  the  ancient  tale  understood  the 
meaning  of  upeyivan;  even  the  grammatical  form  was  a  puzzle^ 
if  not  to  them,  at  least  to  the  scribes. 


XI.  APPARITION    OF    A    StOpA.  245 

was  lying  on  his  couch  ^  and  never  did  I  feel  fatigue 
of  body  or  mind.  In  such  occupations  I  passed 
a  full  millennium. 

And  for  the  fuller  elucidation  of  this  matter  the 
Lord  on  that  occasion  uttered  the  following  stanzas  : 

42.  I  have  a  remembrance  of  past  ages  when  I 
was  Dharmika^,  the  King  of  the  Law,  and  exercised 
the  royal  sway  for  duty's  sake,  not  for  love's  sake,  in 
the  interest  of  the  best  law^ 

43.  I  let  go  out  in  all  directions  this  proclamation: 
I  will  become  a  servant  to  him  who  shall  explain 
Dharma^.  At  that  time  there  was  a  far-seeing  Sage, 
a  revealer  of  the  Siatra  called  the  True  Law^. 

44.  He  said  to  me :  If  thou  wish  to  know  Dharma, 
become  my  servant*^ ;  then  I  will  explain  it  to  thee. 
As  I  heard  these  words  I  rejoiced  and  carefully  per- 
formed such  work  as  a  servant  ought  to  do. 

45.  I  never  felt  any  bodily  nor  mental  weariness 
since  I  had  become  a  servant  for  the  sake  of  the 
true  law.  I  did  my  besf^  for  real  truth's  sake^,  not 
with  a  view  to  win  honour  or  enjoy  pleasure. 

^  ^ayanasya  rmnka.ke  padan  dharayamasa,  which  is  sheer  non- 
sense; we  have  to  read  jayanasya.  The  plural  padan  shows 
that  not  the  feet  are  meant — for  that  is  padau  in  the  dual — but 
the  lower  end  of  the  couch ;  the  plural,  if  applied  to  one  person, 
is  always  metaphorical. 

2  The  text  of  these  verses  is  one  mass  of  corruption,  as  is  proved 
by  the  repeated  offences  against  the  metre. 

^  Perhaps  those  who  changed  the  original  text  intended  to  join 
the  last  sentence  to  the  following. 

*  In  the  intention  of  the  original  author :  (what  is)  Right. 

^  Sutrasya  saddharmanamna//;  this  term  being  prosodically 
inadmissible,  the  original  must  have  had  another  word. 
®  Rather  absurd ;  the  original  must  have  had  '  my  pupil.' 
''  Pra«idhi,  here  synonymous  with  avadhana,  prayatna. 

*  Vastutvaheto-^,  which  is  nonsense;  probably  to  read  vas- 


246  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  XI. 

46.  That  king  meanwhile,  strenuously  and  without 
engaging  in  other  pursuits,  roamed  in  every  direction 
during  thousands  of  ko/is  of  complete  ^ons  without 
being  able  to  obtain  the  Sutra  called  Dharma^ 

Now,  monks,  what  is  your  opinion  ?  that  it  was 
another  who  at  that  time,  at  that  juncture  was  the 
king  ?  No,  you  must  certainly  not  hold  that  view. 
For  it  was  myself,  who  at  that  time,  at  that  juncture 
was  the  king.  What  then,  monks,  is  your  opinion  ? 
that  it  was  another  who  at  that  time,  at  that  junc- 
ture was  the  Seer  ?  No,  you  must  certainly  not 
hold  that  view.  For  it  was  this  Devadatta  himself, 
the  monk  2,  who  at  that  time,  at  that  juncture  was 
the  Seer.  Indeed,  monks,  Devadatta  was  my  good 
friend.  By  the  aid  of  Devadatta^  have  I  accom- 
plished the  six  perfect  virtues  (Paramitas).  Noble 
kindness,  noble  compassion,  noble  sympathy,  noble 
indifference,  the  thirty-two  signs  of  a  great  man,  the 
eighty  lesser  marks*,  the  gold-coloured  tinge,  the 
ten  powers,  the  fourfold  absence  of  hesitation^,  the 
four  articles  of  sociability,  the  eighteen  uncommon 

tutatvahetO;^.  A  later  hand  has  added  a  marginal  reading  sar- 
vasatva,  obviously  intended  to  give  a  Buddhistic  tinge  to  the  tale. 

^  The  traces  of  alteration  are  so  clearly  visible  that  it  is  not 
necessary  to  point  them  out. 

^  Ayam-eva  sa  Devadatto  bhikshus  tena  kalena  tena  samayena 
ri'shir  abhut.  Hence  it  follows  that  Devadatta  is  present  at  the 
gathering.  His  name  not  being  mentioned  before,  he  must  be 
concealed  under  another  name;  I  take  him  to  be  identical  with 
Prabhutaratna. 

^  Devadattamagamya,  properly,  having  come  to  or  reached  D. 

*  Anuvyaw^ana;  they  have  been  thoroughly  treated  of  by 
Burnouf  in  an  Appendix  to  the  Lotus,  p.  583  seq. ;  cf.  Hodgson's 
Essays,  p.  90,  and  S.  Hardy's  Manual,  p.  369. 

^  Vaijaradya;  Burnouf,  Lotus,  p.  396;  S.  Hardy,  Eastern 
Monachism,  p.  291. 


XI.  APPARITION    OF    A    ST^JPA.  247 

properties,  magical  power,  ability  to  save  beings  in  all 
directions  of  space, — all  this  (have  I  got)  after  having 
come  to  Devadatta.  I  announce  to  you,  monks,  I 
declare  to  you  :  This  Devadatta,  the  monk,  shall  in 
an  age  to  come,  after  immense,  innumerable  ^ons, 
become  a  Tathagata  named  Devara^a  (i.  e.  King  of 
the  gods),  an  Arhat,  &c.,  in  the  world  Devasopana 
(i.  e.  Stairs  of  the  gods).  The  lifetime  of  that  Tatha- 
gata Devara^a,  monks,  shall  measure  twenty  inter- 
mediate kalpas.  He  shall  preach  the  law  in  extension, 
and  beings  equal  to  the  sands  of  the  river  Ganges 
shall  through  him  forsake  all  evils  and  realise  Arhat- 
ship.  Several  beings  shall  also  elevate  their  minds 
to  Pratyekabuddhaship,  whereas  beings  equal  to  the 
sands  of  the  river  Ganges  shall  elevate  their  minds  to 
supreme,  perfect  enlightenment,  and  become  endowed 
with  unflinching  patience.  Further,  monks,  after  the 
complete  extinction  of  the  Tathagata  Devara^a,  his 
true  law  shall  stay  twenty  intermediate  kalpas.  His 
body  shall  not  be  seen  divided  into  different  parts 
(and  relics) ;  it  shall  remain  as  one  mass  within  a  Stupa 
of  seven  precious  substances,  which  Sttapa  is  to  be 
sixty  hundred  yo^anas  in  height  and  forty  yo^anas 
in  extension  ^  All,  gods  and  men,  shall  do  worship 
to  it  with  flowers,  incense,  perfumed  garlands,  un- 
guents, powder,  clothes,  umbrellas,  banners,  flags, 
and  celebrate  it  with  stanzas  and  songs.  Those  who 
shall  turn  round  that  Sttapa  from  left  to  right  or 
humbly  salute  it,  shall  some  of  them  realise  Arhat- 
ship,  others  attain  Pratyekabuddhaship  ;  others,  gods 
and  men,  in  immense  number,  shall  raise  their  minds 
to  supreme,  perfect  enlightenment,  never  to  return. 

^  Ayamena,  which  also  means  length. 


248  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARlKA.  XI. 

Thereafter  the  Lord  again  addressed  the  assembly 
of  monks :  Whosoever  in  future,  monks,  be  he  a 
young  man  or  a  young  lady  of  good  family,  shall 
hear  this  chapter  of  the  Stitra  of  the  Lotus  of  the 
True  Law,  and  by  doing  so  be  relieved  from  doubt, 
become  pure-minded,  and  put  reliance  on  it,  to  such 
a  one  the  door  of  the  three  states  of  misfortune  shall 
be  shut :  he  shall  not  fall  so  low  as  to  be  born  in 
hell,  among  beasts,  or  in  Yama's  kingdom.  When 
born  in  the  Buddha-fields  in  the  ten  points  of  space 
he  shall  at  each  repeated  birth  hear  this  very  Sutra, 
and  when  born  amongst  gods  or  men  he  shall  attain 
an  eminent  rank.  And  in  the  Buddha-field  where 
he  is  to  be  born  he  shall  appear  by  metamorphosis 
on  a  lotus  of  seven  precious  substances,  face  to  face 
with  the  Tathagata. 

At  that  moment  a  Bodhisattva  of  the  name  of 
Pra^?1aku/a,  having  come  from  beneath  the  Buddha- 
field  of  the  Tathagata  Prabhtataratna,  said  to  the 
Tathagata  Prabhtataratna :  Lord,  let  us  resort  to 
our  own  Buddha-field.  But  the  Lord  6akyamuni, 
the  Tathagata,  said  to  the  Bodhisattva  Pra^;2aku/a  : 
Wait  a  while,  young  man  of  good  family,  first  have 
a  discussion  with  my  Bodhisattva  Mau^usri,  the 
prince  royal,  to  settle  some  point  of  the  law.  And 
at  the  same  moment,  lo,  Ma^^ui-ri,  the  prince  royal, 
rose  seated  on  a  centifolious  lotus  that  was  large  as 
a  carriage  yoked  with  four  horses,  surrounded  and 
attended  by  many  Bodhisattvas,  from  the  bosom  of 
the  sea,  from  the  abode  of  the  Naga-king  Sagara 
(i.  e.  Ocean).  Rising  high  into  the  sky  he  went 
through  the  air  to  the  GrzdhrakiX^a.  mountain  to  the 
presence  of  the  Lord.  There  Ma7^^ui'ri,  the  prince 
royal,  alighted  from  his  lotus,  reverentially  saluted 


XL  APPARITION    OF    A    STUPA.  249 

the  feet  of  the  Lord  KSakyamuni  and  Prabhutaratna, 
the  Tathagata,  went  up  to  the  Bodhisattva  Pra^^a- 
ku/a  and,  after  making  the  usual  complimentary 
questions  as  to  his  health  and  welfare,  seated  him- 
self at  some  distance.  The  Bodhisattva  Praj^/eak^i/a 
then  addressed  to  Man^sri,  the  prince  royal,  the 
following  question :  Ma.Ti^'usn,  how  many  beings 
hast  thou  educated^  during  thy  stay  in  the  sea  ? 
MaTigVLsri  answered :  Many,  innumerable,  incalcu- 
lable beings  have  I  educated,  so  innumerable  that 
words  cannot  express  it,  nor  thought  conceive  it. 
Wait  a  while,  young  man  of  good  family,  thou  shalt 
presently  see  a  token.  No  sooner  had  Man^iisri, 
the  prince  royal,  spoken  these  words  than  instan- 
taneously many  thousands  of  lotuses  rose  from  the 
bosom  of  the  sea  up  to  the  sky,  and  on  those 
lotuses  were  seated  many  thousands  of  Bodhisattvas, 
who  flocked  through  the  air  to  the  Grzdhraku/a 
mountain,  where  they  stayed,  appearing  as  meteors. 
All  of  them  had  been  educated  by  Mau^wsri,  the 
prince  royal,  to  supreme,  perfect  enlightenment^. 
The  Bodhisattvas  amongst  them  who  had  formerly 
striven  after  the  great  vehicle  extolled  the  virtues 
of  the  great  vehicle  and  the  six  perfect  virtues 
(Paramitas).  Such  as  had  been  disciples  extolled 
the  vehicle  of  disciples.  But  all  acknowledged  the 
voidness  (or  vanity)  of  all  laws  (or  things),  as  well 
as  the  virtues  of  the  great  vehicle.  Mail^wsri,  the 
prince  royal,  said  to  the  Bodhisattva  Pra^;/aku/a  : 
Young  man  of  good  family,  while  I  was  staying  in 
the  bosom  of  the  great  ocean  I  have  by  all  means 

^  Properly,  lead,  lead  out. 

'  Here  M^iilgusn  appears  in  the  character  of  Hermes  ^|/vxo'Tonn6s. 


250  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARlKA.  XI. 

educated  creatures,  and  here  thou  seest  the  result. 
Whereupon  the  Bodhisattva  Pra^?1akii/a  questioned 
Maugnsri,  the  prince  royal,  in  chanting  the  following 
stanzas : 

47.  O  thou  blessed  one,  who  from  thy  wisdom  art 
called  the  Sage\  by  whose  power  is  it  that  thou 
to-day  (or  now)  hast  educated  those  innumerable 
beings  ?  Tell  it  me  upon  my  question,  O  thou  god 
amongst  men^. 

48.  What  law  hast  thou  preached,  or  what  Stitra,  in 
showing  the  path  of  enlightenment,  so  that  those  who 
are  there  with  you  have  conceived  the  idea  of  enlight- 
enment ?  that,  once  having  gained  a  safe  ford'^,  they 
have  been  decisively  established  in  omniscience  ? 

M3.7i£nsn  answered:  In  the  bosom  of  the  sea 
I  have  expounded  the  Lotus  of  the  True  Law  and  no 
other  Sutra.  Pra^/'^akii/a  said  :  That  Sutra  is  pro- 
found, subtle,  difficult  to  seize  ;  no  other  Statra  equals 
it.  Is  there  any  creature  able  to  understand  this 
jewel  of  a  Statra  or  to  arrive  at  supreme,  perfect 
enlightenment  ?  Msul^usri  replied  :  There  is,  young 
man  of  good  family,  the  daughter  of  Sagara,  the 
Naga-king,  eight  years  old,  very  intelligent,  of  keen 
faculties,  endowed  with  prudence  in  acts  of  body, 
speech,  and  mind,  who  has  caught  and  kept  all  the 
teachings,  in  substance  and  form,  of  the  Tathagatas, 
who  has  acquired  in  one  moment  a  thousand  medi- 
tations and  proofs  of  the  essence  of  all  laws*.     She 

^  Mahabhadra  pra^waya  suranaman.  I  take  sura  in  the  sense  of 
suri,  though  it  is  also  possible  that  sura  stands  for  jura,  a  hero. 

^  Naradeva. 

^  Labdhagatha^^ ;  I  think  we  have  to  read  labdhagadha-^, 
and  have  translated  accordingly. 

*  The  reading  is  uncertain ;  sarvadharmasatvasamadhanasama- 


XI.  APPARITION    OF    A    ST^PA.  25T 

does  not  swerve  from  the  idea  of  enlightenment,  has 
great  aspirations,  appHes  to  other  beings  the  same 
measure  as  to  herself ;  she  is  apt  to  display  all  vir- 
tues and  is  never  deficient  in  them.  With  a  bland 
smile  on  the  face  and  in  the  bloom  of  an  extremely 
handsome  appearance  she  speaks  words  of  kindliness 
and  compassion ^  She  is  fit  to  arrive  at  supreme, 
perfect  enlightenment.  The  Bodhisattva  Pra^^^a- 
kfi^'a  said  :  I  have  seen  how  the  Lord  vSakyamuni, 
the  Tathagata,  when  he  was  striving  after  enlighten- 
ment, in  the  state  of  a  Bodhisattva,  performed  innu- 
merable good  works^,  and  during  many  ^ons  never 
slackened  in  his  arduous  task.  In  the  whole  universe 
there  is  not  a  single  spot  so  small  as  a  mustard-seed 
where  he  has  not  surrendered  his  body  for  the  sake 
of  creatures  ^  Afterwards  he  arrived  at  enlighten- 
ment. Who  then  would  believe  that  she  should  have 
been  able  to  arrive  at  supreme,  perfect  knowledge 
in  one  moment  ? 

At  that  very  moment  appeared  the  daughter  of 
Sagara,  the  Naga-king,  standing  before  their  face. 
After  reverentially  saluting  the  feet  of  the  Lord  she 
stationed  herself  at  some  distance  and  uttered  on 
that  occasion  the  followingf  stanzas  : 

dhisahasraikakshawapratilabhini,  A  marginal  correction  by  a  later 
hand  adds  sarva  between  dharma  and  satva. 

^  The  daughter  of  Sagara,  the  Ocean,  is  Lakshmi,  the  smiling 
goddess  of  Beauty  and  Fortune,  but  from  some  traits  in  the  sequel 
it  would  seem  that  she  is  identified  with  Tara,  the  wife  of  Br?ha- 
spati  and  the  Moon. 

^  As  Hercules  performed  his  ad\a. 

^  As  the  sun  shoots  his  rays  everywhere,  it  is  quite  natural  that 
his  dhatus,  i.e.  particles,  rehcs,  have  been  spread  all  over  the 
surface  of  the  earth,  and  it  is  no  untruth  that  the  footprints  (the 
pad  as,  rays)  of  the  Lord  5'akyamuni  are  to  be  found  in  Laos, 
in  Ceylon,  &c. 


252  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARtKA.  XT. 

49.  Spotless,  bright,  and  of  unfathomable  light  is 
that  ethereal  body,  adorned  with  the  thirty -two  cha- 
racteristic signs,  pervading  space  in  all  directions. 

50.  He  is  possessed  of  the  secondary  marks  and 
praised  by  every  being,  and  accessible  to  all,  like 
an  open  market-placed 

51.  I  have  obtained  enlightenment  according  to 
my  wish ;  the  Tathagata  can  bear  witness  to  it ;  I 
will  extensively  reveal  the  law  that  releases  from 
sufferance. 

Then  the  venerable  ^ariputra  said  to  that  daughter 
of  Sagara,  the  Naga-king  :  Thou  hast  conceived  the 
idea  of  enlightenment,  young  lady  of  good  family, 
without  sliding  back,  and  art  gifted  with  immense 
wisdom,  but  supreme,  perfect  enlightenment  is  not 
easily  won.  It  may  happen,  sister,  that  a  woman 
displays  an  unflagging  energy,  performs  good  works 
for  many  thousands  of  ^ons,  and  fulfils  the  six 
perfect  virtues  (Paramitas),  but  as  yet  there  is  no 
example  of  her  having  reached  Buddhaship,  and  that 
because  a  woman  cannot  occupy  the  five  ranks,  viz. 
I.  the  rank  of  Brahma ;  2.  the  rank  of  Indra  ;  3.  the 
rank  of  a  chief  guardian  of  the  four  quarters  ;  4.  the 
rank  of  A'akravartin  ;  5.  the  rank  of  a  Bodhisattva 
incapable  of  sliding  back^. 

Now  the  daughter  of  Sagara,  the  Naga-king,  had  at 
the  time  a  gem  which  in  value  outweighed  the  whole 
universe.  That  gem  the  daughter  of  Sagara,  the 
Naga-king,  presented  to  the  Lord,  and  the  Lord 
graciously  accepted  it.  Then  the  daughter  of  Sagara, 

^  Antarapawavad  yatha.  I  am  not  certain  of  the  correctness 
of  my  translation,     Burnouf  has  '  s'il  ^tait  leur  concitoyen.' 

^  All  these  beings  are  in  Sanskrit  of  masculine  gender ;  hence 
their  rank  cannot  be  taken  by  beings  "having  feminine  names. 


XL  APPARITION    OF    A    ST^PA.  253 

the  Naga-king,  said  to  the  Bodhisattva  Pra^;7a- 
ku/a  and  the  senior  priest  .S'driputra ;  Has  the 
Lord  readily  accepted^  the  gem  I  presented  him  or 
has  he  not  ?  The  senior  priest  answered  :  As  soon 
as  it  was  presented  by  thee,  so  soon  it  was  accepted 
by  the  Lord.  The  daughter  of  Sagara,  the  Naga- 
king,  rephed  :  If  I  were  endowed  with  magic  power, 
brother  ^ariputra,  I  should  sooner  have  arrived  at 
supreme,  perfect  enlightenment,  and  there  would 
have  been  none  to  receive  this  gem. 

At  the  same  instant,  before  the  sight  of  the  whole 
world  and  of  the  senior  priest  6ariputra,  the  female 
sex  of  the  daughter  of  Sagara,  the  Naga-king,  dis- 
appeared ;  the  male  sex  appeared  ^  and  she  mani- 
fested herself  as  a  Bodhisattva,  who  immediately 
went  to  the  South  to  sit  down  at  the  foot  of  a  tree 
made  of  seven  precious  substances,  in  the  world 
Vimala  (i.  e.  spotless),  where  he  showed  himself 
enlightened  and  preaching  the  law,  while  filling  all 
directions  of  space  with  the  radiance  of  the  thirty- 
two  characteristic  signs  and  all  secondary  marks. 
All  beings  in  the  Saha-world  beheld  that  Lord  while 
he  received  the  homage  of  all,  gods,  Nagas,  goblins, 
Gandharvas,  demons,  Garu^as,  Kinnaras,  great  ser- 
pents, men,  and  beings  not  human,  and  was  engaged 

*  A  marginal  reading  from  a  later  hand  adds:  anukampam 
upadaya,  by  grace,  by  mercy,  graciously. 

^  In  ancient  times  such  a  change  of  sex  is  nothing  strange. 
Sundry  words  for  'star,'  e.g.  tara,  taraka,  Latin  stella,  are 
feminine,  whereas  the  names  of  some  particular  stars  are  mascu- 
line; so  Tara,  the  daughter  of  the  Sea,  Stella  Marina,  may  have 
been  identified  with  Tishya,  or  the  Iranian  Tishtrya,  who  equally 
rises  from  the  sea;  cf.  Tishter  Yasht  (ed.  Westergaard,  p.  177). 
The  daughter  of  the  ocean  seems  to  be  identical  with  Ardvi  Sura, 
celebrated  in  Aban  Yasht. 


254  SADDHARMA-PUA^Z)ARIKA.  XI. 

in  preaching  the  law.  And  the  beings  who  heard 
the  preaching  of  that  Tathagata  became  incapable 
of  sliding  back  in  supreme,  perfect  enlightenment. 
And  that  world  Vimala  and  this  Saha-world  shook 
in  six  different  ways.  Three  thousand  living  beings 
from  the  congregational  circle  of  the  Lord  ^'akya- 
muni  gained  the  acquiescence  in  the  eternal  law  ^ 
whereas  three  hundred  thousand  beings  obtained  the 
prediction  of  their  future  destiny  to  supreme,  perfect 
enlightenment. 

Then  the  Bodhisattva  Pra^/^aku/a  and  the  senior 
priest  ^'ariputra  were  silent. 

^  Anutpattikadharmakshanti. 


XII.  EXERTION.  255 


CHAPTER   XII. 


EXERTION. 


Thereafter  the  Bodhisattva  Bhaisha^yara^a  and 
the  Bodhisattva  Mahapratibhana,  with  a  retinue  of 
twenty  hundred  thousand  Bodhisattvas,  spoke  before 
the  face  of  the  Lord  the  following  words  :  Let  the 
Lord  be  at  ease  in  this  respect ;  we  will  after  the  ex- 
tinction of  the  Tathagata  expound  this  Paryaya  to 
(all)  creatures^,  though  we  are  aware,  O  Lord,  that 
at  that  period  there  shall  be  malign  beings,  having 
few  roots  of  goodness,  conceited,  fond  of  gain  and 
honour,  rooted  in  unholiness,  difficult  to  tame, 
deprived  of  good  will,  and  full  of  unwillingness. 
Nevertheless,  O  Lord,  we  will  at  that  period  read, 
keep,  preach,  write,  honour,  respect,  venerate,  wor- 
ship this  S6tra ;  with  sacrifice  of  body  and  life,  O 
Lord,  we  will  divulge  this  Sutra.  Let  the  Lord  be 
at  ease. 

Thereupon  five  hundred  monks  of  the  assembly, 
both  such  as  were  under  training  and  such  as  were 
not,  said  to  the  Lord :  We  also,  O  Lord,  will  exert 
ourselves  to  divulge  this  Dharmaparyaya,  though  in 
other  worlds.  Then  all  the  disciples  of  the  Lord, 
both  such  as  were  under  training  and  such  as  were 

'■  One  would  expect  that  this  speech  immediately  followed  st.  41 
in  the  foregoing  chapter,  but  the  rules  of  composition  in  Buddhistic 
writings  are  so  peculiar  that  it  is  unsafe  to  apply  criticism. 


256  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  XII. 

not,  who  had  received  from  the  Lord  the  prediction 
as  to  their  (future)  supreme  enhghtenment,  all  the 
eight  thousand  monks  raised  their  joined  hands 
towards  the  Lord  and  said :  Let  the  Lord  be  at 
ease.  We  also  will  divulge  this  Dharmaparyaya, 
after  the  complete  extinction  of  the  Lord,  in  the 
last  days,  the  last  period,  though  in  other  worlds. 
For  in  this  Saha-world,  O  Lord,  the  creatures  are 
conceited,  possessed  of  few  roots  of  goodness, 
always  vicious  in  their  thoughts,  wicked,  and  natu- 
rally perverse. 

Then  the  noble  matron  Gautami,  the  sister  of 
the  Lord's  mother,  along  with  six  hundred^  nuns, 
some  of  them  being  under  training,  some  being  not, 
rose  from  her  seat,  raised  the  joined  hands  towards 
the  Lord  and  remained  gazing  up  to  him.  Then  the 
Lord  addressed  the  noble  matron  Gautami :  Why 
dost  thou  stand  so  dejected,  gazing  up  to  the 
Tathagata  ?  (She  replied) :  I  have  not  been  men- 
tioned by  the  Tathagata,  nor  have  I  received  from 
him  a  prediction  of  my  destiny  to  supreme,  perfect 
enlightenment.  (He  said):  But,  Gautami,  thou  hast 
received  a  prediction  with  the  prediction  regarding 
the  whole  assembly.  Indeed,  Gautami,  thou  shalt 
from   henceforward,  before  the  face  of  thirty- eight 


^  Ciphers  do  not  count,  so  that  only  six  must  be  reckoned.  These 
six  with  Gautami  form  the  number  of  seven.  The  seven  Matres 
or  Mother-goddesses  are  known  from  Indian  mythology.  Kumara, 
the  prince  royal  (Skanda),  is  sometimes  said  to  have  six  mothers, 
sometimes  seven,  sometimes  one.  The  six  are  said  to  be  the  six 
clearly  visible  Krz'ttikas  (Pleiads) ;  the  seventh  is  the  less  distinct 
star  of  the  Pleiads.  His  one  mother  is  Durga.  It  is  by  mistake 
that  the  dictionaries  fix  the  number  of  Kr/ttikas  at  six ;  there  are 
seven,  as  appears  e.g.  from  Mahabharata  III,  230,  11. 


XII.  EXERTION.  257 

hundred  thousand  myriads  of  ko/is  of  Buddhas  \  be 
a  Bodhisattva  and  preacher  of  the  law.  These  six 
thousand-  nuns  also,  partly  perfected  in  discipline, 
partly  not,  shall  along  with  others  become  Bodhi- 
sattvas^  and  preachers  of  the  law  before  the  face  of 
the  Tathagatas.  Afterwards,  when  thou  shalt  have 
completed  the  course  of  a  Bodhisattva,  thou  shalt 
become,  under  the  name  of  Sarvasattvapriyadari^ana 
(i.  e.  lovely  to  see  for  all  beings),  a  Tathagata,  an 
Arhat,  &c.,  endowed  with  science  and  conduct,  &c. 
&c.  And  that  Tathagata  Sarvasattvapriyadar^ana, 
O  Gautami,  shall  give  a  prediction  by  regular  succes- 
sion to  those  six  thousand  Bodhisattvas  concerningf 
their  destiny  to  supreme,  perfect  enlightenment. 

Then  the  nun  Yaj"odhara,  the  mother  of  Rahula, 
thought  thus :  The  Lord  has  not  mentioned  my  name. 
And  the  Lord  comprehending  in  his  own  mind  what 
was  going  on  in  the  mind  of  the  nun  Yai^odhara  said 
to  her :  I  announce  to  thee,  Ya^odhara,  I  declare  to 
thee  :  Thou  also  shalt  before  the  face  often  thousand 
ko/is*  of  Buddhas  become  a  Bodhisattva  and  preacher 
of  the  law,  and  after  regularly  completing  the  course 
of  a  Bodhisattva  thou  shalt  become  a  Tathagata, 
named  Rai-mi^atasahasraparipur/^adhva^a,  an  Arhat, 
&c.,  endowed  with  science  and  conduct,  &c.  &c.,  in  the 


^  In  the  margin  has  been  added  by  a  later  hand  :  '  after  paying 
honour,  respect,  reverence,  worship,  and  veneration.'  A  little 
further  on  we  find  the  same  marginal  addition. 

2  A  few  lines  before  the  number  was  six  hundred.  Both 
numbers  come  to  the  same,  for  ciphers  do  not  count. 

^  Here  it  is  not  added  that  Gautami  cum  suis  has  to  change 
sex  (i.e.  gender)  in  order  to  be  fit  for  Bodhisattvaship.  In  fact, 
the  Kr/ttikas  are  always  feminine  in  Sanskrit. 

*  Burnouf  has  read,  ten  hundred  thousand  myriads  of  ko/is. 

[21]  S 


258  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARiKA.  XII. 

world  Bhadra ;  and  the  lifetime  of  that  Lord  Rai^mi- 
j'atasahasraparipur/^adhva^a  shall  be  unlimited. 

When  the  noble  matron  Gautami,  the  nun,  with 
her  suite  of  six  thousand  nuns,  and  Ya^odhara,  the 
nun,  with  her  suite  of  four  thousand  nuns,  heard  from 
the  Lord  their  future  destiny  to  supreme,  perfect 
enlightenment,  they  uttered,  in  wonder  and  amaze- 
ment, this  stanza  : 

I.  O  Lord,  thou  art  the  trainer,  thou  art  the 
leader ;  thou  art  the  master  of  the  world,  including 
the  gods ;  thou  art  the  giver  of  comfort,  thou  who 
art  worshipped  by  men  and  gods.  Now,  indeed,  we 
feel  satisfied. 

After  uttering  this  stanza  the  nuns  said  to  the 
Lord :  We  also,  O  Lord,  will  exert  ourselves  to 
divulge  this  Dharmaparyaya  in  the  last  days,  though 
in  other  worlds. 

Thereafter  the  Lord  looked  towards  the  eighty 
hundred  thousand  Bodhisattvas  who  were  gifted 
with  magical  spells  and  capable  of  moving  forward  the 
wheel  that  never  rolls  back.  No  sooner  were  those 
Bodhisattvas  regarded  by  the  Lord  than  they  rose 
from  their  seats,  raised  their  joined  hands  towards 
the  Lord  and  reflected  thus :  The  Lord  invites 
us  to  make  known  the  Dharmaparyaya.  Agitated 
by  that  thought  they  asked  one  another :  What 
shall  we  do,  young  men  of  good  family,  in  order 
that  this  Dharmaparyaya  may  in  future  be  made 
known  as  the  Lord  invites  us  to  do  ?  Thereupon 
those  young  men  of  good  family,  in  consequence 
of  their  reverence  for  the  Lord  and  their  own  pious 
vow  in  their  previous  course,  raised  a  lion's  roar^ 
before  the  Lord  :  We,  O  Lord,  will  in  future,  after  the 

^  One  might  say,  a  cry  of  martial  exultation. 


XIT.  EXERTION.  259 

complete  extinction  of  the  Lord,  go  in  all  directions 
in  order  that  creatures  shall  write,  keep,  meditate, 
divulge  this  Dharmaparyaya,  by  no  other's  power  but 
the  Lord's.  And  the  Lord,  staying  in  another  world, 
shall  protect,  defend,  and  guard  us. 

Then  the  Bodhisattvas  unanimously  in  a  chorus 
addressed  the  Lord  with  the  following  stanzas : 

2.  Be  at  ease,  O  Lord.  After  thy  complete  ex- 
tinction, in  the  horrible  last  period  of  the  world,  we 
will  proclaim  this  sublime  Sutra. 

3.  We  will  suffer,  patiently  endure,  O  Lord,  the 
injuries,  threats,  blows  and  threats  with  sticks*  at 
the  hands  of  foolish  men. 

4.  At  that  dreadful  last  epoch  men  will  be  malign, 
crooked,  wicked, dull,  conceited,  fancying  to  have  come 
to  the  limit  when  they  have  not. 

5.  'We  do  not  care  but  to  live  in  the  wilderness 
and  wear  a  patched  cloth ;  we  lead  a  frugal  life ; ' 
so  will  they  speak  to  the  ignorant^. 

6.  And  persons  greedily  attached  to  enjoyments 
will  preach  the  law  to  laymen  and  be  honoured  as 
if  they  possessed  the  six  transcendent  qualities. 

7.  Cruel-minded  and  wicked  men,  only  occupied 
with  household  cares,  will  enter  our  retreat  in  the 
forest  and  become  our  calumniators. 

8.  The  Tirthikas^,  themselves  bent  on  profit  and 
honour,  will  say  of  us  that  we  are  so,  and — shame  on 
such  monks! — they  will  preach  their  own  fictions ^ 

^  Da«</a-udgira«a,  for  which  I  think  we  have  to  read  da«</a- 
udgurawa. 

^  Durmatin. 

^  Dissenters,  as  the  foremost  of  whom  generally  appear  the 
Gainas,  from  the  Buddhist  point  of  view. 

*  Tirthika   vat'  ime    bhikshii    svani    kavyani    derayu^.      Here 

S  2 


260  SADDHARMA-PUJVDARiKA.  XII. 

9.  Prompted  by  greed  of  profit  and  honour  they 
will  compose  Sutras  of  their  own  invention  and  then, 
in  the  midst  of  the  assembly,  accuse  us  of  plagiarism  \ 

10.  To  kings,  princes,  king's  peers,  as  well  as  to 
Brahmans  and  commoners,  and  to  monks  of  other 
confessions, 

11.  They  will  speak  evil  of  us  and  propagate  the 
Tirtha-doctrine^.  We  will  endure  all  that  out  of 
reverence  for  the  great  Seers. 

12.  And  those  fools  who  will  not  listen  to  us, 
shall  (sooner  or  later)  become  enlightened  ^  and 
therefore  will  we  forbear  to  the  last. 

13.  In  that  dreadful,  most  terrible  period  of  fright- 
ful general  revolution  will  many  fiendish  monks  stand 
up  as  our  revilers. 

14.  Out  of  respect  for  the  Chief  of  the  world  we 
will  bear  it,  however  difficult  it  be ;  girded  with  the 
girdle  of  forbearance  will  I  ^  proclaim  this  Sutra. 

15.  P  do  not  care  for  my  body  or  life,  O  Lord, 

we  have  the  interjection  vat  a  (bat  a)  in  the  sense  of  a  ninda, 
reproach,  contempt.  The  Buddhists  are  fond  of  denouncing  schis- 
matics or  heretics  as  impostors,  and  their  works  as  forgeries ; 
a  model  of  such  an  accusation  brought  forward  by  the  orthodox 
against  the  '  wicked '  monks,  the  Va^^iputtakas,  is  to  be  found  in 
Dipava7/zsa  V,  30  seqq. 

^  Or,  perhaps,  speak  slander  of  us.  The  term  used,  anuku//ana, 
is  unknown  to  me  from  other  passages,  so  that  I  have  had  recourse 
to  etymology:  anu,  after,  ku//ana,  stamping. 

^  These  passages  are  not  very  explicit,  but  this  much  is  clear  that 
the  Tirthikas  are  somehow  akin  to  the  Buddhists,  and  distinguished 
from  monks  of  other  confession,  who  are  wholly  out  of  the  pale  of 
Bauddha  sects.  The  whole  history  of  the  church  in  India  is  one 
of  family  quarrels,  at  least  down  to  the  days  of  Hiouen  Thsang. 

^  Or,  Buddhas,  i.e.  will  sooner  or  later  die. 

*  Prakajaye,  a  singular  which  I  do  not  feel  at  liberty  to  render 
by  a  plural. 

*  Again  a  singular,  anarthiko'smi. 


XII.  EXERTION.  261 

but  as  keepers  of  thine  entrusted  deposit  we  care  for 
enlightenment. 

16.  The  Lord  himself  knows  that  in  the  last  period 
there  are  (to  be)  wicked  monks  who  do  not  under- 
stand mysterious  speech  ^ 

17.  One  will  have  to  bear  frowning  looks,  re- 
peated disavowal  (or  concealment),  expulsion  from 
the  monasteries,  many  and  manifold  abuses^. 

18.  Yet  mindful  of  the  command  of  the  Lord  of 
the  world  we  will  in  the  last  period  undauntedly 
proclaim  this  Stitra  in  the  midst  of  the  congre- 
gation. 

19.  We  will  visit  towns  and  villages  everywhere, 
and  transmit  to  those  who  care  for  it  thine  entrusted 
deposit,  O  Lord. 

20.  O  Chief  of  the  world,  we  will  deliver  thy 
message ;  be  at  ease  then,  tranquil  and  quiet,  great 
Seer. 

21.  Light  of  the  world,  thou  knowest  the  dis- 
position of  all  who  have  flocked  hither  from  every 
direction,  (and  thou  knowest  that)  we  speak  a  word 
of  truth. 


'  Sandhabhashya,  here  rather  '  conciUatory  speech;'  this  is 
the  meaning  which  sandhaya  sambhashawa  has  in  Sanskrit. 

"^  The  rendering  of  the  last  words  bahuku//i  bahfavidha^ 
is  conjectural.  Burnouf  has,  '  emprisonner  et  frapper  de  diverses 
manieres,'  but  hereby  two  meanings  are  assigned  to  ku//J. 


A 


262  SADDHARMA-PUA^DARIKA.  XIII 


CHAPTER  XIII. 


PEACEFUL    LIFE. 


Ma-il^usn,  the  prince  royal,  said  to  the  Lord :  It  is 
difficult,  Lord,  most  difficult,  what  these  Bodhisattvas 
Mahasattvas  will  attempt  out  of  reverence  for  the 
Lord.  How  are  these  Bodhisattvas  Mahasattvas  to 
promulgate  this  Dharmaparyaya  at  the  end  of  time, 
at  the  last  period  ?  Whereupon  the  Lord  answered 
Maug-usri,  the  prince  royal :  A  Bodhisattva  Maha- 
sattva,  MangMsri,  he  who  is  to  promulgate  this  Dhar- 
maparyaya at  the  end  of  time,  at  the  last  period, 
must  be  firm  in  four  things.  In  which  things  ?  The 
Bodhisattva  Mahasattva,  Majlg-usn,  must  be  firm  in 
his  conduct  and  proper  sphere  if  he  wishes  to  teach 
this  Dharmaparyaya.  And  how,  Ma/^^u-s-ri,  is  a  Bodhi- 
sattva Mahasattva  firm  in  his  conduct  and  proper 
sphere  ?  When  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva,  Mail- 
^ui-ri,  is  patient,  meek,  has  reached  the  stage  of 
meekness  ;  when  he  is  not  rash,  nor  envious  ;  when, 
moreover,  Mangusri,  he  clings  to  no  law  whatever  and 
sees  the  real  character  of  the  laws  (or  things)  ;  when 
he  is  refraining  from  investigating  and  discussing 
these  laws,  Mang'u.sri ;  that  is  called  the  conduct  of  a 
Bodhisattva  Mahasattva.  And  what  is  the  proper 
sphere  of  a  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva,  Maflgusri  ? 
When  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva,  Mailgxisri,  does 
not  serve,  not  court,  not  wait  upon  kings ;  does 
not  serve,  not  court,  not  wait  upon  princes ;  when 
he    does    not   approach    them ;    when  he  does   not 


XIII.  PEACEFUL    LIFE.  263 

serve,    not    court,    not   wait    upon    persons    of   an- 

A 

other  sect,  A'arakas,  Parivra^akas,  Agivakas\  Nir- 
granthas^,  nor  persons  passionately  fond  of  fine 
literature;  when  he  does  not  serve,  not  court,  not 
wait  upon  adepts  at  worldly  spells^,  and  votaries  of 
a  worldly  philosophy*,  nor  keep  any  intercourse  with 
them  ;  when  he  does  not  go  to  see  A'a;^(^alas,  jugglers, 
vendors  of  pork,  poulterers,  deer-hunters,  butchers, 
actors  and  dancers,  wrestlers,  nor  resort  to  places 
whither  others  flock  for  amusement  and  sport ;  when 
he  keeps  no  intercourse  with  them  unless  from  time 
to  time  to  preach  the  law  to  them  when  they  come 
to  him,  and  that  freely^;  when  he  does  not  serve, 
not  court,  not  wait  upon  monks,  nuns,  lay  devotees, 
male  and  female,  who  are  adherents  of  the  vehicle 
of  disciples,  nor  keep  intercourse  with  them ;  when 
he  does  not  come  in  contact  with  them  at  the  place 
of  promenade  or  in  the  monastery,  unless  from  time 
to  time  to  preach  the  law  to  them  when  they  come 
to  him,  and  even  that  freely.  This,  Ma;l^um,  is  the 
proper  sphere  of  a  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva. 

Again,  MaTigVLsri,  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  does 
not  take  hold  of  some  favourable  opportunity  or 
another  to  preach  the  law  to  females  every  now  and 
anon,  nor  is  he  desirous  of  repeatedly  seeing  females  ; 
nor  does  he  think  it  proper  to  visit  families  and  then 
too  often  address  a  girl,  virgin,  or  young  wife,  nor 
does  he  greet  them  too  fondly  in  return.     He  does 


'  Three  kinds  of  mendicant  friars  not  belonging  to  the  Buddliist, 
nor  to  the  Gaina  persuasion. 
^  Gaina  monks. 
^  Lokayatamantradharaka. 

^  Lokayatikas,  the  Sadducees  or  Epicureans  of  India. 
^  Anijrita;  Burnouf  renders  it, '  sans  meme  s'arreter.' 


264  SADDHARMA-PUiV2)ARlKA.  XIII. 

not  preach  the  law  to  a  hermaphrodite,  keeps  no 
intercourse  with  such  a  person,  nor  greets  too  friendly 
in  return.  He  does  not  enter  a  house  alone  in  order 
to  receive  alms,  unless  having  the  Tathagata  in  his 
thoughts.  And  when  he  happens  to  preach  the  law 
to  females,  he  does  not  do  so  by  passionate  attach- 
ment to  the  law,  far  less  by  passionate  attachment 
to  a  woman.  When  he  is  preaching,  he  does  not 
display  his  row  of  teeth,  let  alone  a  quick  emotion 
on  his  physiognomy.  He  addresses  no  novice,  male 
or  female,  no  nun,  no  monk,  no  young  boy,  no  young 
girl,  nor  enters  upon  a  conversation  with  them ;  he 
shows  no  great  readiness  in  answering  their  address  \ 
nor  cares  to  give  too  frequent  answers.  This,  Ma;'^- 
£Msri,  is  called  the  first  proper  sphere  of  a  Bodhisattva 
Mahasattva. 

Further,  Ma^l^u^ri,  a  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  looks 
upon  all  laws  (and  things)  as  void ;  he  sees  them 
duly  established 2,  remaining  unaltered,  as  they  are 
in  reality,  not  liable  to  be  disturbed,  not  to  be  moved 
backward,  unchangeable,  existing  in  the  highest  sense 
of  the  word  (or  in  an  absolute  sense),  having  the 
nature  of  space,  escaping  explanation  and  expression, 
by  means  of  common  speech,  not  born,  composed  and 
simple,  aggregated  and  isolated^,  not  expressible  in 
words,  independently  established,  manifesting  them- 

^  Pratisa/wlapanaguruka,  literally  'making  much  of  return- 
ing (one's)  addressing.' 

^  YathavatpratishMitan,  aviparitasthayino  yathabhutan,  &c.  Bur- 
nouf  adds,  'privies  de  toute  essence,'  i.e.  niratmakan. 

^  In  the  rendering  of  the  last  four  terms  I  have  followed  Burnouf, 
as  the  reading  in  the  Camb.  MS.  is  evidently  corrupt:  asawi- 
skrztanasa/;2tanasawmanasannabhilapena  pravyahr/tan. 
The  original  reading  may  have  been  asa;«skr/tan  n a. 53.7/1  skri- 
tan,  not  composed,  not  simple;  nasaman  na  saman,  not  unlike 


XIII.  PEACEFUL    LIFE.  265 

selves  owing  to  a  perversion  of  perception.  In  this 
way  then,  Man^xisri,  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva 
constantly  views  all  laws,  and  if  he  abides  in  this 
course,  he  remains  in  his  own  sphere.  This,  Ma;1- 
^u^-ri,  is  the  second  proper  sphere  of  a  Bodhisattva 
Mahasattva. 

And  in  order  to  expound  this  matter  in  greater 
detail,  the  Lord  uttered  the  following  stanzas  : 

1.  The  Bodhisattva  who,  undaunted  and  un- 
abashed, wishes  to  set  forth  this  Siitra  in  the 
dreadful  period  hereafter, 

2.  Must  keep  to  his  course  (of  duty)  and  proper 
sphere ;  he  must  be  retired  and  pure,  constantly 
avoid  intercourse  with  kings  and  princes, 

3.  Nor  should  he  keep  up  intercourse  with  king's 
servants,  nor  with  A'a;^^alas,  jugglers,  and  Tirthikas 
in  generals 

4.  He  ought  not  to  court  conceited  men,  but 
catechise  such  as  keep  to  the  religion  I  He  must 
also  avoid  such  monks  as  follow  the  precepts  of  the 
Arhat^  and  immoral  men. 

5.  He  must  be  constant  in  avoiding  a  nun  who 
is  fond  of  banter  and  chatter ;  he  must  also  avoid 
notoriously  loose  female  lay  devotees. 

6.  He  should  shun  any  intercourse  with  such 
female  lay  devotees  as  seek  their  highest  happiness 

(i.e.  equal  to  all),  nor  like;  or,  n  a  saw  tan  (in  grammatical  Sansk. 
nasato)  na  sawnan,  not  non-existent,  not  existent. 

^  Burnouf  adds,  '  ceux  qui  vendent  des  liqueurs  fermentdes,' 
which  is  wanting  in  my  MS. :  /ia.nda.hir  mush/ikaijMpi  tirthikai^- 
/^api  sarvaja/^. 

^  According  to  the  reading,  vinayed  agamasthita(n).  A  mar- 
ginal reading  has  vinayena°,  a  reading  followed  by  Burnouf. 

^  Or,  Arhats  :  Arhantasa»/mata(n)  bhikhshiin.  The  (?ainas 
are  meant. 


266  SADDHARMA-PUiVZ^ARIKA.  XIII. 


in   this   transient  world.     This  is  called  the  proper 
conduct  of  a  Bodhisattva. 

7.  But  when  one  comes  to  him  to  question  him 
about  the  law  for  the  sake  of  superior  enlighten- 
ment, he  should,  at  any  time,  speak  freely,  always 
firm  and  undaunted. 

8.  He  should  have  no  intercourse  with  women 
and  hermaphrodites ;  he  should  also  shun  the  young 
wives  and  girls  in  families. 

9.  He  must  never  address  them  to  ask  after 
their  health \  He  must  also  avoid  intercourse  with 
vendors  of  pork  and  mutton. 

10.  With  any  persons  who  slay  animals  of  various 
kind  for  the  sake  of  profit,  and  with  such  as  sell  meat 
he  should  avoid  having  any  intercourse. 

11.  He  must  shun  the  society  of  whoremongers, 
players,  musicians,  wrestlers,  and  other  people  of 
that  sort. 

12.  He  should  not  frequent  whores,  nor  other 
sensual  persons ;  he.  must  avoid  any  exchange  of 
civility  with  them. 

13.  And  when  the  sage  has  to  preach  for  a 
woman,  he  should  not  enter  into  an  apartment  with 
her  alone,  nor  stay  to  banter. 

14.  When  he  has  often  to  enter  a  village  in  quest 
of  food,  he  must  have  another  monk  with  him  or 
constantly  think  of  the  Buddha. 

15.  Herewith  have  I  shown  the  first  sphere  of 
proper  conduct 2,  Wise  are  they  who,  keeping  this 
Siitra  in  memory,  live  according  to  it. 

16.  And  when  one  observes  ^  no  law  at  all,  low, 

^  Kamalya»2  hasa  ^rikkhiium.     I  take  has  a  to  stand  for  asa 
(Sansk.  asam),  if  it  be  no  error  for  tasa  (Sansk.  tasam). 
^  A/^aragO/^aro  hy  esha.  ^  A'arate. 


XIII.  PEACEFUL    LIFE.  267 

superior  or  mean,  composed  or  uncomposed,  real  or 
not  real ; 

1 7.  When  the  wise  man  does  not  remark,  '  This 
is  a  woman,'  nor  marks,  '  This  is  a  man  ;'  when  in 
searching  he  finds  no  laws  (or  things),  because  they 
have  never  existed  ; 

18.  This  is  called  the  observance^  of  the  Bodhi- 
sattvas  in  general.  Now  listen  to  me  when  I  set 
forth  what  should  be  their  proper  sphere. 

19.  All  laws  (i.e.  the  laws,  the  things)  have  been 
declared  to  be  non-existing,  not  appearing,  not  pro- 
duced, void,  immovable,  everlasting ;  this  is  called 
the  proper  sphere  of  the  wise. 

20.  They  have  been  divided  into  existing  and 
non-existing,  real  and  unreal,  by  those  who  had 
wrong  notions ;  other  laws  also,  of  permanency,  of 
being  produced,  of  birth  from  something  already 
produced"^,  are  wrongly  assumed. 

21.  Let  (the  Bodhisattva)  be  concentrated  in  mind, 
attentive,  ever  firm  as  the  peak  of  Mount  Sumeru, 
and  in  such  a  state  (of  mind)  look  upon  all  laws  (and 
things)  as  having  the  nature  of  space  ^, 

22.  Permanently  equal  to  space,  without  essence, 
immovable,  without  substantiality*.  These,  indeed, 
are  the  laws,  all  and  for  ever.  This  is  called  the 
proper  sphere  of  the  wise. 

23.  The  monk  observing  this  rule  of  conduct  given 
by  me  may,  after  my  extinction,  promulgate  this 
Sutra  in  the  world,  and  shall  feel  no  depression. 

24.  Let  the  sage  first,  for  some  time,  coerce  his 

^  A^ara. 

2  G'atada  bhuti  (Sansk.  ^atad  bhuti>^). 

^  I.  e.  as  being  void. 

*  Satyena;  in  the  margin  atm  an  a. 


268  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARiKA.  XIII. 

thoughts,  exercise  meditation  with  complete  absorp- 
tion, and  correctly  perform  all  that  is  required  for 
attaining  spiritual  insight \  and  then,  after  rising  (from 
his  pious  meditation),  preach  with  unquailing  mind. 

25.  The  kings  of  this  earth  and  the  princes  who 
listen  to  the  law  protect  him.  Others  also,  both 
laymen  (or  burghers)  and  Brahmans,  will  be  found 
together  in  his  congregation. 

Further,  Maugusri,  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva 
who,  after  the  complete  extinction  of  the  Tathagata 
at  the  end  of  time,  the  last  period,  the  last  five 
hundred  years ^  when  the  true  law  is  in  a  state  of 
decay,  is  going  to  propound  this  Dharmaparyaya, 
must  be  in  a  peaceful  state  (of  mind)  and  then  preach 
the  law,  whether  he  knows  it  by  heart  or  has  it  in 
a  book.  In  his  sermon  he  will  not  be  too  prone  to 
carping  at  others,  not  blame  other  preaching  friars, 
not  speak  scandal  nor  propagate  scandal.  He  does 
not  mention  by  name  other  monks,  adherents  of 
the  vehicle  of  disciples,  to  propagate  scandal.  He 
cherishes  even  no-  hostile  feelings  against  them, 
because  he  is  in  a  peaceful  state.  All  who  come,  one 
after  the  other,  to  hear  the  sermon  he  receives  with 
benevolence,  and  preaches  the  law  to  them  without 
invidiousness^.     He  refrains  from  entering  upon  a 

^  Kalena  ko  /^ittayamatu  (Sansk.  °yamat)  pa«</ita/^  pravilayanaw 
tatha  gha//ayitva,  vipa^yidharmam  imu  sarva  yoniso  utthaya,  &c. 
I  take  gha//ayitva  in  the  sense  of  gha/ayitva=yuktva. 

^  I.e.  11  the  latter  part  of  the  millennium.  According  to  the 
declaration  of  the  Buddha  in  iiTullavagga  X,  i,  6,  the  true  law 
(Saddhamma)  is  to  stand  a  millennium,  though  at  the  same 
time,  owing  to  the  institution  of  female  monks,  the  number  of 
1000  years  should  be  reduced  to  half. 

^  Anuparigrahikaya,  ananyusManaya  dharmaw  dejayati ;  "su-^a- 
naya  is  certainly  wrong;  cf.  stanza  30  below. 


XITI.  PEACEFUL    LIFE.  269 

dispute ;  but  if  he  is  asked  a  question,  he  does  not 
answer  in  the  way  of  (those  who  follow)  the  vehicle 
of  disciples^  ;  on  the  contrary,  he  answers  as  if  he 
had  attained  Buddha-knowledge, 

And  on  that  occasion  the  Lord  uttered  the  follow- 
ing stanzas  : 

26.  The  wise  man^  is  always  at  ease^,  and  in  that 
state  he  preaches  the  law,  seated  on  an  elevated 
pulpit  which  has  been  prepared  for  him  on  a  clean 
and  pretty  spot. 

27.  He  puts  on  a  clean,  nice,  red  robe,  dyed  with 
good  colours^,  and  a  black  woollen  garment  and 
a  long  undergarment ; 

28.  Having  duly  washed  his  feet  and  rubbed  his 
head  and  face  with  smooth  ointments^,  he  ascends 
the  pulpit,  which  is  provided  with  a  footbank  and 
covered  with  pieces  of  fine  cloth  of  various  sorts, 
and  sits  down. 

29.  When  he  is  thus  seated  on  the  preacher's 
pulpit  and  all  who  have  gathered   round  him  are 


^  Sravakayanena.  It  is  instructive  to  see  that  ttie  Buddha 
here  espouses  the  party  of  the  great  vehicle. 

^  I.e.  preacher,  minister  of  religion.  The  word  used,  pa«<fita, 
has  passed  into  the  languages  of  the  Indian  Archipelago  in  the 
sense  of  a  minister  of  religion. 

*  Sukhasthita,  which  in  the  preceding  passage  I  have  rendered 
by  'being  in  a  peaceful  state,'  because  there  the  mental  state  is 
more  prominent. 

*  -ff'aukshaw  kz.  so  -^ivara  pravaritva  suraktarahgaw  supra^as- 
tarahgai/z. 

^  According  to  the  ten  commandments  (Dasajila)  the  use  of 
ointments  is  forbidden  to  the  monks,  but  the  preacher  need  not  be 
a  monastic  man.  In  Nepal  it  is  the  Va^'-ra-AHrya  who  devotes 
himself  to  the  active  ministry  of  religion ;  see  Hodgson's  Essays, 
p.  52. 


A. 


270  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  XIIT. 

attentive,  he  proceeds  to  deliver  many  discourses, 
pleasing  by  variety,  before  monks  and  nuns, 

30.  Before  male  and  female  lay  devotees,  kings 
and  princes.  The  wise  man  always  (takes  care  to) 
deliver  a  sermon  diversified  in  its  contents  and 
sweet,  free  from  invidiousness\ 

31.  If  occasionally  he  is  asked  some  question, 
even  after  he  has  commenced,  he  will  explain  the 
matter  anew  in  regular  order,  and  he  will  explain  it 
in  such  away  that  his  hearers  gain  enlightenment. 

32.  The  wise  man  is  indefatigable  ;  not  even  the 
thought  of  fatigue  will  rise  in  him ;  he  knows  no 
listlessness,  and  so  displays  to  the  assembly  the 
strength  of  charity. 

2,;^.  Day  and  night  the  wise  man  preaches  this 
sublime  law  with  myriads  of  ko/is  of  illustrations ; 
he  edifies  and  satisfies  his  audience  without  ever 
requiring  anything. 

34.  Solid  food,  soft  food,  nourishment  and  drink, 
cloth,  couches,  robes,  medicaments  for  the  sick,  all 
this  does  not  occupy  his  thoughts,  nor  does  he  want 
anything  from  the  congregation. 

35.  On  the  contrary,  the  wise  man  is  always 
thinking :  How  can  I  and  these  beings  become 
Buddhas  ?  I  will  preach  this  true  law,  upon  which 
the  happiness  of  all  beings  depends^,  for  the  benefit 
of  the  world. 

36.  The  monk  who,  after  my  extinction,  shall 
preach  in  this  way,  without  envy,  shall  not  meet 
with  trouble,  impediment,  grief  or  despondency. 

37.  Nobody  shall   frighten  him,   beat   or   blame 


^  Ananyasfiyantu;  perhaps  we  must  read  anabhyasflyantu. 
^  Etat  samasatvasukhopadhana;«  saddharma;«  jravemi  hitaya  loke. 


XIII.  PEACEFUL    LIFE.  271 

him ;  never  shall  he  be  driven  away,  because  he  is 
firm  in  the  strength  of  forbearance. 

38.  The  wise  man  who  is  peaceful,  so  disposed 
as  I  have  just  said,  possesses  hundreds  of  ko/is  of 
advantages,  so  many  that  one  would  not  be  able 
to  enumerate  them  in  hundreds  of  .^ons. 

Again,  Man^usd,  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva 
who  lives  after  the  extinction  of  the  Tathagata  at 
the  end  of  time  when  the  true  law  is  in  decay,  the 
Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  who  keeps  this  Sutra  is  not 
envious,  not  false,  not  deceitful ;  he  does  not  speak 
disparagingly  of  other  adherents  of  the  vehicle  of 
Bodhlsattvas,  nor  defame,  nor  humble  them.  He 
does  not  bring  forward  the  shortcomings  of  other 
monks,  nuns,  male  and  female  lay  devotees,  neither 
of  the  adherents  of  the  vehicle  of  disciples  nor  of 
those  of  the  vehicle  of  Pratyekabuddhas.  He  does 
not  say:  You  young  men  of  good  family,  you  are  far 
off  from  supreme,  perfect  enlightenment ;  you  give 
proof  of  not  having  arrived  at  it ;  you  are  too  fickle 
in  your  doings  and  not  capable  of  acquiring  true 
knowledge.  He  does  not  in  this  way  bring  forward 
the  shortcomings  of  any  adherent  of  the  vehicle  of  the 
Bodhlsattvas.  Nor  does  he  show  any  delight  In  dis- 
putes about  the  law,  or  engage  in  disputes  about  the 
law,  and  he  never  abandons  the  strength  of  charity 
towards  all  beings.  In  respect  to  all  Tathagatas  he 
feels  as  if  they  were  his  fathers,  and  in  respect  to  all 
Bodhlsattvas  as  if  they  were  his  masters.  And  as 
to  the  Bodhlsattvas  Mahasattvas  in  all  directions  of 
space,  he  is  assiduous  in  paying  homage  to  them  by 
good  will  and  respect.  When  he  preaches  the  law, 
he  preaches  no  less  and  no  more  than  the  law,  with- 
out partial  predilection  for  (any  part  of)  the  law,  and 


272  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARiKA.  XIII. 

he  does  not  show  greater  favour  to  one  than  to 
another,  even  from  love  of  the  law. 

Such,  Mail^-usri,  is  the  third  quality  with  which 
a  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  is  endowed  who  is  to 
expound  this  Dharmaparyaya  after  the  extinction 
of  the  Tathagata  at  the  end  of  time  when  the  true 
law  is  in  decay;  who  will  live  at  ease^  and  not  be 
annoyed  in  the  exposition  of  this  Dharmaparyaya. 
And  in  the  synod  ^  he  will  have  allies,  and  he  will 
find  auditors  at  his  sermons  who  will  listen  to  this 
Dharmaparyaya,  believe,  accept,  keep,  read,  pene- 
trate, write  it  and  cause  it  to  be  written,  and  who, 
after  it  has  been  written  and  a  volume  made  of  it, 
will  honour,  respect,  esteem,  and  worship  it. 

This  said  the  Lord,  and  thereafter  he,  the  Sugata, 
the  Master,  added  the  following : 

39.  The  wise  man,  the  preacher,  who  wishes  to 
expound  this  Sutra  must  absolutely  renounce  false- 
hood, pride,  calumny,  and  envy. 

40.  He  should  never  speak  a  disparaging  word  of 
anybody;  never  engage  in  a  dispute  on  religious 
belief;  never  say  to  such  as  are  guilty  of  short- 
comings, You  will  not  obtain  superior  knowledge. 

41.  He  is  always  sincere,  mild,  forbearing;  (as)  a 
(true)  son  of  Sugata  he  will  repeatedly  preach  the 
law  without  any  feeling  of  vexation. 

42.  'The  Bodhisattvas  in  all  directions  of  space, 
who  out  of  compassion  for  creatures  are  moving  in 
the  world,  are  my  teachers  ;'  (thus  thinking)  the  wise 
man  respects  them  as  his  masters. 


^  Sukhya[?«]   sparjaw  viharati,  which  answers  to  the  Pali 
phrase  phasu  viharati. 
^  Dharmasahgityam. 


XIII.  PEACEFUL    LIFE.  2/3 

43.  Cherishing  the  memory  of  the  Buddhas,  the 
supreme  amongst  men,  he  will  always  feel  towards 
them  as  if  they  were  his  fathers,  and  by  forsaking  all 
idea  of  pride  he  will  escape  hindrance. 

44.  The  wise  man  who  has  heard  this  law,  should 
be  constant  in  observing  it.  If  he  earnestly  strives 
after  a  peaceful  life,  ko/is  of  beings  will  surely  pro- 
tect him. 

Further,  Man^nsri,  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva, 
living  at  the  time  of  destruction  of  the  true  law  after 
the  extinction  of  the  Tathagata,  who  is  desirous  of 
keeping  this  Dharmaparyaya,  should  live  as  far  as 
possible  away  from  laymen  and  friars,  and  lead  a  life 
of  charity.  He  must  feel  affection  for  all  beings  who 
are  striving  for  enlightenment  and  therefore  make  this 
reflection  :  To  be  sure,  they  are  greatly  perverted  in 
mind,  those  beings  who  do  not  hear,  nor  perceive,  nor 
understand  the  skilfulness  and  the  mystery^  of  the 
Tathagata,  who  do  not  inquire  for  it,  nor  believe  in  it, 
nor  even  are  willing  to  believe  in  it.  Of  course,  these 
beings  do  not  penetrate,  nor  understand  this  Dharma- 
paryaya. Nevertheless  will  I,  who  have  attained ^ 
this  supreme,  perfect  knowledge,  powerfully^  bend  to 
it  the  mind  of  every  one,  whatever  may  be  the  position 
he  occupies,  and  bring  about  that  he  accepts,  under- 
stands, and  arrives  at  full  ripeness. 

By  possessing  also  this  fourth  quality,  Man^-usri, 
a  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva,  who  is  to  expound  the 
law  after  the  extinction  of  the  Tathagata,  will  be 

^  Sandhabhashita. 

^  Abhisambudhya. 

'  Balena;  in  the  margin  added  by  a  later  hand,  r/ddhi;  this  is 
the  reading  followed  by  Burnouf,  '  par  la  force  de  mes  facultds 
surnaturelles.' 


2  74  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARtKA.  XIII. 

unmolested,  honoured,  respected,  esteemed,  vene- 
rated by  monks,  nuns,  and  lay  devotees,  male  and 
female,  by  kings,  princes,  ministers,  king's  officers, 
by  citizens  and  country  people,  by  Brahmans  and 
laymen  ;  the  gods  of  the  sky  will,  full  of  faith,  follow 
his  track  to  hear  the  law,  and  the  angels  will  follow 
his  track  to  protect  him ;  whether  he  is  in  a  village 
or  in  a  monastery,  they  will  approach  him  day  and 
night  to  put  questions  about  the  law,  and  they  will 
be  satisfied,  charmed  with  his  explanation.  For 
this  Dharmaparyaya,  Mai^fum,  has  been  blessed  by 
all  Buddhas.  With  the  past,  future,  and  present 
Tathagata,  M2Ln£Visd,  this  Dharmaparyaya  is  for 
ever  blessed.  Precious^  in  all  worlds,  MailgMsri,  is 
the  sound,  rumour,  or  mentioning  of  this  Dharma- 
paryaya. 

It  is  a  case,  Ma^^^ri,  similar  to  that  of  a  king, 
a  ruler  of  armies,  who  by  force  has  conquered 
his  own  kingdom,  whereupon  other  kings,  his 
adversaries,  wage  war  against  him.  That  ruler 
of  armies  has  soldiers  of  various  description  to 
fight  with  various  enemies.  As  the  king  sees  those 
soldiers  fighting,  he  is  delighted  with  their  gal- 
lantry, enraptured,  and  in  his  delight  and  rapture 
he  makes  to  his  soldiers  several  donations,  such  as 
villages  and  village  grounds,  towns  and  grounds  of 
a  town ;  garments  and  head-gear ;  hand-ornaments, 
necklaces,  gold  threads,  earrings,  strings  of  pearls, 
bullion,  gold,  gems,  pearls,  lapis  lazuli,  conch-shells, 
stones  {?),  corals;  he,  moreover,  gives  elephants, 
horses,  cars,  foot  soldiers,  male  and  female  slaves, 
vehicles,  and  litters.   But  to  none  he  makes  a  present 


Durlabha,  also  meaning  rare,  difficult  to  be  got. 


XIII.  PEACEFUL    LIFE.  275 

of  his  crown  jewel,  because  that  jewel  only  fits  on 
the  head  of  a  king.  Were  the  king  to  give  away 
that  crown  jewel,  then  that  whole  royal  army,  con- 
sisting of  four  divisions,  would  be  astonished  and 
amazed.  In  the  same  manner,  Man^'usri,  the  Tatha- 
gata,  the  Arhat,  &c.,  exercises  the  reign  of  righteous- 
ness (and  of  the  law)  in  the  triple  world  which  he  has 
conquered  by  the  power  of  his  arm  and  the  power  of 
his  virtue.  His  triple  world  is  assailed  by  Mara, 
the  Evil  One.  Then  the  Aryas,  the  soldiers  of  the 
Tathagata,  fight  with  Mara.  Then,  Ma;'^^u5ri,  the 
king  of  the  law,  the  lord  of  the  law,  expounds  to 
the  Aryas,  his  soldiers,  whom  he  sees  fighting,  hun- 
dred thousands  of  Sutras  in  order  to  encouragfe  the 
four  classes.  He  gives  them  the  city  of  Nirva/^a, 
the  great  city  of  the  law  ;  he  allures  them  with  that 
city  of  Nirva/^a,  but  he  does  not  preach  to  them  such 
a  Dharmaparyaya  as  this.  Just  as  in  that  case, 
Mafto-usri,  that  king,  ruler  of  armies,  astonished  at 
the  great  valour  of  his  soldiers  in  battle  gives  them 
all  his  property,  at  last  even  his  crown  jewel,  and 
just  as  that  crown  jewel  has  been  kept  by  the  king 
on  his  head  to  the  last,  so,  Ma;^^um,  the  Tatha- 
gata, the  Arhat,  &c.,  who  as  the  great  king  of  the 
law  in  the  triple  world  exercises  his  sway  with  jus- 
tice, when  he  sees  disciples  and  Bodhisattvas  fighting 
against  the  Mara  of  fancies  or  the  Mara  of  sinful 
inclinations,  and  when  he  sees  that  by  fighting  they 
have  destroyed  affection,  hatred,  and  infatuation, 
overcome  the  triple  world  and  conquered  all  Maras, 
is  satisfied,  and  in  his  satisfaction  he  expounds  to 
those  noble  (arya)  soldiers  this  Dharmaparyaya  which 
meets  opposition  in  all  the  world,  the  unbelief  of  all 
the  world,  a  Dharmaparyaya  never  before  preached, 

T  2 


2  76  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARlKA.  XITI. 

never  before  explained.  And  the  Tathagata  bestows 
on  all  disciples  the  noble  crown  jewel,  that  most 
exalted  crown  jewel  which  brings  omniscience  to  all. 
For  this,  MaLUgusri,  is  the  supreme  preaching  of  the 
Tathagatas ;  this  is  the  last  Dharmaparyaya  of  the 
Tathagatas  ;  this  is  the  most  profound  discourse  on 
the  law,  a  Dharmaparyaya  meeting  opposition  in  all 
the  world.  In  the  same  manner,  Ma-H^Msri,  as  that 
king  of  righteousness  and  ruler  of  armies  took  off 
the  crown  jewel  which  he  had  kept  so  long  a  time 
and  gave  it  (at  last)  to  the  soldiers,  so,  Ma/z^um,  the 
Tathagata  now  reveals  this  long-kept  mystery  of 
the  law  exceeding  all  others,  (the  mystery)  which 
must  be  known  by  the  Tathagatas. 

And  in  order  to  elucidate  this  matter  more  in 
detail,  the  Lord  on  that  occasion  uttered  the  follow- 
ing stanzas : 

45.  Always  displaying  the  strength  of  charity, 
always  filled  with  compassion  for  all  creatures,  ex- 
pounding this  law,  the  Sugatas  have  approved  this 
exalted  Statra. 

46.  The  laymen,  as  well  as  the  mendicant  friars, 
and  the  Bodhisattvas  who  shall  live  at  the  end  of 
time,  must  all  show  the  strength  of  charity,  lest  those 
who  hear  the  law  reject  it. 

47.  But  I,  when  I  shall  have  reached  enlighten- 
ment and  be  established  in  Tathagataship,  will 
initiate  (others),  and  after  having  initiated  disciples^ 
preach  everywhere  this  superior  enlightenment. 

48.  It  is  (a  case)  like  that  of  a  king,  ruler  of 
armies,  who  gives  to  his  soldiers  various  things, 
gold,  elephants,  horses,  cars,  foot  soldiers ;  he  also 

*  Tato  upaneshyi  upayayitva  sawjravayishye  imam  agrabodhim. 


XIII.  PEACEFUL    LIFE.  277 

gives  towns   and  villages,  in  token  of  his  content- 
ment. 

49.  In  his  satisfaction  he  gives  to  some  hand- 
ornaments,  silver  and  gold  thread ;  pearls,  gems, 
conch-shells,  stones (?),  coral ;  he  also  gives  slaves  of 
various  description. 

50.  But  when  he  is  struck  with  the  incomparable 
daring  of  one  amongst  the  soldiers,  he  says :  Thou 
hast  admirably  done  this  ;  and,  taking  off  his  crown, 
makes  him  a  present  of  the  jewel. 

51.  Likewise  do  I,  the  Buddha,  the  king  of  the 
law,  I  who  have  the  force  of  patience  and  a  large 
treasure  of  wisdom,  with  justice  govern  the  whole 
world,  benign,  compassionate,  and  pitiful. 

52.  And  seeing  how  the  creatures  are  in  trouble, 
I  pronounce  thousands  of  ko/is  of  S^itrdntas,  when 
I  perceive  the  heroism  of  those  living  beings  who 
by  pure-mindedness  overcome  the  sinful  inclinations 
of  the  world. 

53.  And  the  king  of  the  law,  the  great  physician, 
who  expounds  hundreds  of  ko/is  of  Paryayas,  when 
he  recognises  that  creatures  are  strong,  shows  them 
this  Siitra,  comparable  to  a  crown  jewel. 

54.  This  is  the  last  Sutra  proclaimed  in  the  world, 
the  most  eminent  of  all  my  Statras,  which  I  have 
always  kept  and  never  divulged.  Now  I  am  going 
to  make  it  known  ;  listen  all. 

55.  There  are  four  qualities  to  be  acquired  by 
those  who  at  the  period  after  my  extinction  desire 
supreme  enlightenment  and  perform  my  charge  \ 
The  qualities  are  such  as  follows. 

56.  The  wise   man  knows    no  vexation,  trouble, 

*  Vyaparana. 


278  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  XIII. 


sickness  ;  the  colour  of  his  skin  is  not  blackish  ;  nor 
does  he  dwell  in  a  miserable  town. 

57.  The  great  Sage  has  always  a  pleasant  look, 
deserves  to  be  honoured,  as  if  he  were  the  Tatha- 
gata  himself,  and  little  angels  shall  constantly  be  his 
attendants. 

58.  His  body  can  never  be  hurt  by  weapons, 
poison,  sticks,  or  clods,  and  the  mouth  of  the  man 
who  utters  a  word  of  abuse  against  him  shall  be 
closed. 

59.  He  is  a  friend  to  all  creatures  in  the  world. 
He  goes  all  over  the  earth  as  a  light,  dissipating  the 
gloom  of  many  ko/is  of  creatures,  he  who  keeps  this 
Sutra  after  my  extinction. 

60.  In  his  sleep  he  sees  visions  in  the  shape  of 
Buddha ;  he  sees  monks  and  nuns  appearing  on 
thrones  and  proclaiming  the  many-sided  law. 

61.  He  sees  in  his  dream  gods  and  goblins,  (nu- 
merous) as  the  sands  of  the  Ganges,  as  well  as 
demons  and  Nagas  of  many  kinds,  who  lift  their 
joined  hands  and  to  whom  he  expounds  the  emi- 
nent law. 

62.  He  sees  in  his  dream  the  Tathagata  preaching 
the  law  to  many  ko/is  of  beings  with  lovely  voice, 
the  Lord  with  golden  colour. 

63.  And  he  stands  there  with  joined  hands  glori- 
fying the  Seer,  the  highest  of  men,  whilst  the  6^ina, 
the  great  physician,  is  expounding  the  law  to  the 
four  classes. 

64.  And  he,  glad  to  have  heard  the  law,  joyfully 
pays  his  worship,  and  after  having  soon  reached  the 
knowledge  which  never  slides  back,  he  obtains,  in 
dream,  magical  spells. 

65.  And  the  Lord  of  the  world,  perceiving  his  good 


XIIT.  '  PEACEFUL    LIFE.  279 

intention,  announces  to  him  his  destiny  of  becoming 
a  leader  amongst  men  :  Young  man  of  good  family 
(says  he),  thou  shalt  here  reach  in  future  supreme, 
holy  knowledge. 

66.  Thou  shalt  have  a  large  field  and  four  classes 
(of  hearers),  'even  as  myself,  that  respectfully  and 
with  joined  hands  shall  hear  from  thee  the  vast  and 
faultless  law. 

6"].  Again  he  sees  his  own  person  occupied  with 
meditating  on  the  law  in  mountain  caverns  ;  and 
by  meditating  he  attains  the  very  nature  of  the 
law  and,  on  obtaining  complete  absorption,  sees 
the  6"ina. 

68.  And  after  seeing  in  his  dream  the  gold- 
coloured  one,  him  who  displays  a  hundred  hallowed 
signs,  he  hears  the  law,  whereafter  he  preaches  it  in 
the  assembly.     Such  is  his  dream. 

69.  And  in  his  dream  he  also  forsakes  his  whole 
realm,  harem,  and  numerous  kinsfolk;  renouncing 
all  pleasures  he  leaves  home  (to  become  an  ascetic), 
and  betakes  himself  to  the  place  of  the  terrace  of 
enlightenment. 

70.  There,  seated  upon  a  throne  at  the  foot  of 
a  tree  to  seek  enlightenment,  he  wilP,  after  the 
lapse  of  seven  days,  arrive  at  the  knowledge  of 
the  Tathagatas. 

71.  On  having  reached  enlightenment  he  will  rise 
up  from  that  place  to  move  forward  the  faultless 
wheel  and  preach  the  law  during  an  inconceivable 
number  of  thousands  of  ko/is  of  ^ons. 

72.  After  having  revealed  perfect  enlightenment 
and  led  many  ko/is   of  beings  to  perfect  rest,  he 

^  Anuprapsyate. 


28o  SADDHARMA-PU^DARiKA.  XIII. 

himself  will  be  extinguished  like  a  lamp  when  the  oil 
is  exhausted.     So  is  that  vision. 

73.  Endless,  Ma/^^oighosha,  are  the  advantages 
which  constantly  are  his  who  at  the  end  of  time 
shall  expound  this  Stitra  of  superior  enlightenment 
that  I  have  perfectly  explained. 


XIV.  ISSUING    OF    BODHISATTVAS.  28 1 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

ISSUING    OF    BODHISATTVAS   FROM    THE    GAPS    OF 

THE    EARTH. 

Out  of  the  multitude  of  Bodhisattvas  Mahasattvas 
who  had  flocked  from  other  worlds,  Bodhisattvas 
eight  (times)  equal  to  the  sands  of  the  river  Ganges^ 
then  rose  from  the  assembled  circle.  Their  joined 
hands  stretched  out  towards  the  Lord  to  pay  him 
homage,  they  said  to  him  :  If  the  Lord  will  allow  us, 
we  also  would,  after  the  extinction  of  the  Lord,  reveal 
this  Dharmaparyaya  in  this  Saha-world ;  we  would 
read,  write,  worship  it,  and  wholly  devote  ourselves^ 
to  that  law.  Therefore,  O  Lord,  deign  to  grant  to  us 
also  this  Dharmaparyaya.  And  the  Lord  answered  : 
Nay,  young  men  of  good  family,  why  should  you 
occupy  yourselves  with  this  task  ?  I  have  here  in 
this  Saha-world  thousands  of  Bodhisattvas  equal  to 
the  sands  of  sixty  Ganges  rivers,  forming  the  train 
of  one  Bodhisattva ;  and  of  such  Bodhisattvas  there 
is  a  number  equal  to  the  sands  of  sixty  Ganges  rivers, 
each  of  these  Bodhisattvas  having  an  equal  number 

'  The  text  has  ash/au  Gahganadivalikasama  Bodhi- 
satvas.  Burnouf  renders  the  passage  by  'en  nombre  ^gal  a  celui 
des  sables  de  huit  Ganges.'  Perhaps  we  must  understand  eight  to 
mean  eight  thousand,  just  as  e.  g.  Dipava;?/sa  VI,  98  the  word 
eighty-four  denotes  eighty-four  thousand. 

*  Yogam  apadyemahi. 


282  SADDHARMA-PUiVZ)ARiKA.  XIV. 

in  their  train,  who  at  the  end  of  time,  at  the  last 
period  after  my  extinction,  shall  keep,  read,  proclaim 
this  Dharmaparyaya. 

No  sooner  had  the  Lord  uttered  these  words  than 
the  Saha-world  burst  open  on  every  side,  and  from 
within  the  clefts  arose  many  hundred  thousand 
myriads  of  ko^'is  of  Bodhisattvas  with  gold-coloured 
bodies  and  the  thirty-two  characteristic  signs  of  a 
great  man,  who  had  been  staying  in  the  element  of 
ether  underneath  this  great  earth,  close  to  this  Saha- 
world.  These  then  on  hearing  the  word  of  the  Lord 
came  up  from  below  the  earth.  Each  of  these  Bodhi- 
sattvas had  a  train  of  thousands  of  Bodhisattvas 
similar  to  the  sands  of  sixty  Ganges^  rivers;  (each  had) 
a  troop,  a  great  troop,  as  teacher  of  a  troop.  Of  such 
Bodhisattvas  Mahasattvas  having  a  troop,  a  great 
troop,  as  teachers  of  a  troop,  there  were  hundred 
thousands  of  myriads  of  ko/is  equal  to  the  sands  of 
sixty  Ganges^  rivers,  who  emerged  from  the  gaps 
of  the  earth  in  this  Saha-world.  Much  more  there 
were  to  be  found  of  Bodhisattvas  Mahasattvas 
having  a  train  of  Bodhisattvas  similar  to  the  sands 
of  fifty  Ganges  rivers  ;  much  more  there  were  to  be 
found  of  Bodhisattvas  Mahasattvas  having  a  train 
of  Bodhisattvas  similar  to  the  sands  of  forty  Ganges 
rivers;  of  30^  20,  10,  5,  4,  3,  2,  i  Ganges  river;  of 
1  1  1  i  i-  1   J_  _2_      1  1  1  1 

2'  4'  6'   10'   20'   50'    100'   1000'   100,000'  10,000,000'   100x10,000,000'   1000x10,000,000' 


^  Or,  a  train  of  sixty  thousand  Bodhisattvas  similar  to  the  sands 
of  the  river  Ganges. 

"^  Shash/y  eva,  which  is  ungrammatical,  for  shash/ir  eva,  or 
it  is  a  corrupt  reading. 

'  The  text  goes  on  repeating  the  same  words,  save  the  difference 
of  number ;  I  have  given  the  contents  in  a  shortened  form. 


XIV.  ISSUING    OF    BODHISATTVAS.  283 

100  X 1000  X  10,000,000'  100  X 1000  X  10,000  x  10,000,000  ps^^t  01  the  river 
Ganges.  Much  more  there  were  to  be  found  of 
Bodhisattvas  Mahasattvas  having  a  train  of  many 
hundred  thousand  myriads  of  ko/is  of  Bodhisattvas  ; 
of  one  ko^i ;  of  one  hundred  thousand  ;  of  one  thou- 
sand; of  500;  of  400;  of  300;  of  200;  of  100;  of 
50 ;  of  40  ;  of  30  ;  of  20  ;  of  10  ;  of  5,  4,  3,  2.  Much 
more  there  were  to  be  found  of  Bodhisattvas  Maha- 
sattvas having  one  follower.  Much  more  there  were 
to  be  found  of  Bodhisattvas  Mahasattvas  standing 
isolated.  They  cannot  be  numbered,  counted,  calcu- 
lated, compared,  known  by  occult  science,  the  Bodhi- 
sattvas Mahasattvas  who  emerged  from  the  gaps  of 
the  earth  to  appear  in  this  Saha-world.  And  after 
they  had  successively  emerged  they  went  up  to  the 
Stupa  of  precious  substances  which  stood  in  the  sky, 
where  the  Lord  Prabhutaratna,  the  extinct  Tathagata, 
was  seated  along  with  the  Lord  6'akyamuni  on  the 
throne.  Whereafter  they  saluted  the  feet  of  both 
Tathagatas,  &c.,  as  well  as  the  images  of  Tathagatas 
produced  by  the  Lord  KSakyamuni  from  his  own 
body,  who  all  together  were  seated  on  thrones  at  the 
foot  of  various  jewel  trees  on  every  side  in  all  direc- 
tions, in  different  worlds.  After  these  Bodhisattvas 
had  many  hundred  thousand  times  saluted,  and 
thereon  circumambulated  the  Tathagatas,  &c.,  from 
left  to  right,  and  celebrated  them  with  various  Bodhi- 
sattva  hymns,  they  went  and  kept  themselves  at  a 
little  distance,  the  joined  hands  stretched  out  to 
honour  the  Lord  ^'akyamuni,  the  Tathagata,  &c., 
and  the  Lord  PrabhCitaratna,  the  Tathagata,  &c. 

And  while  those  Bodhisattvas  Mahasattvas  who 
had  emerged  from  the  gaps  of  the  earth  were  saluting 
and  celebrating  the  Tathagatas  by  various  Bodhi- 


284  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  XIV. 

sattva  hymns,  fifty  intermediate  kalpas  in  full  rolled 
away,  during  which  fifty  intermediate  kalpas  the 
Lord  ►Sakyamuni  remained  silent,  and  likewise  the 
four  classes  of  the  audience.  Then  the  Lord  pro- 
duced such  an  effect  of  magical  power  that  the  four 
classes  fancied  that  it  had  been  no  more  than  one 
afternoon^  and  they  saw  this  Saha-world  assume 
the  appearance  of  hundred  thousands  of  worlds^ 
replete  with  Bodhisattvas  ^  The  four  Bodhisattvas 
Mahisattvas  who  were  the  chiefest  of  that  great 
host  of  Bodhisattvas,  viz.  the  Bodhisattva  Maha- 
sattva  called  Vi^ish/a/^aritra  (i.  e.  of  eminent  con- 
duct), the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  called  Ananta- 
/^aritra  (i.  e.  of  endless  conduct),  the  Bodhisattva 
Mahasattva  called  Vii^uddha/^'aritra  (i.  e.  of  correct 
conduct),  and  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  called 
Supratish/z^ita/^aritra  (i.  e.  of  very  steady  conduct), 
these    four   Bodhisattvas   Mahasattvas   standing   at 


*  If  we  take  kalpa  or  uEon  (i.e.  a  day  of  twenty-four  hours)  to 
contain  eighty  intermediate  kalpas,  it  is  impossible  that  either 
fifty  or  five  intermediate  kalpas  should  be  equal  to  an  afternoon. 
A  so-called  Asahkhyeya  kalpa  has  twenty  intermediate  kalpas,  and 
is,  in  reality,  equal  to  six  hours,  so  that  five  intermediate  kalpas 
will  embrace  a  time  of  i^  hour.  If  we  might  take  an  Asahkhyeya 
to  be  the  equivalent  of  a  day  of  twenty-four  hours,  the  reckoning 
would  be  correct,  for  then  five  intermediate  kalpas  would  be  equal 
to  six  hours ;  we  can,  however,  produce  no  authority  for  Asah- 
khyeya kalpa  ever  being  used  in  the  (esoteric)  sense  of  a  day  and 
night. 

*  Lokadhatu.ratasahasrakaraparigr/hitam,  which  ought 
to  be  °karap°,  or  °kara;«  p°.  Instances  of  the  peculiar  construc- 
tion of  parigr/hita  after  the  analogy  of  prapta  are  found, 
Lalita-vistara,  pp.  109, 112,  181,  368.  A  marginal  would-be  cor- 
rection has  °kasaffi  p°. 

'  The  afternoon  being  at  an  end,  the  innumerable  spheres  of 
the  stars  become  visible. 


XIV.  ISSUING    OF    BODHISATTVAS.  285 

the  head  of  the  great  host,  the  great  multitude  of 
Bodhisattvas  stretched  out  the  joined  hands  towards 
the  Lord  and  addressed  him  thus :  Is  the  Lord  in 
good  health  ?  Does  he  enjoy  well-being  and  good 
ease  ?  Are  the  creatures  decorous,  docile,  obedient, 
correctly  performing  their  task  ^  so  that  they  give  no 
trouble  to  the  Lord  ? 

And  those  four  Bodhisattvas  Mahisattvas  ad- 
dressed the  Lord  with  the  two  following  stanzas  : 

1.  Does  the  Lord  of  the  world,  the  illuminator, 
feel  at  ease  ?  Dost  thou  feel  free  from  bodily  dis- 
ease, O  Perfect  One  ? 

2.  The  creatures,  we  hope,  will  be  decorous,  docile, 
performing  the  orders^  of  the  Lord  of  the  world,  so  as 
to  give  no  trouble. 

And  the  Lord  answered  the  four  Bodhisattvas 
Mahasattvas  who  were  at  the  head  of  that  great 
host,  that  great  multitude  of  Bodhisattvas  :  So  it  is, 
young  men  of  good  family,  I  am  in  good  health, 
well-being,  and  at  ease.  And  these  creatures  of 
mine  are  decorous,  docile,  obedient,  well  performing 
what  is  ordered ;  they  give  no  trouble  when  I  cor- 
rect them^;  and  that,  young  men  of  good  family, 
because  these  creatures,  owing  to  their  being  already 
prepared  under  the  ancient,  perfectly  enlightened 
Buddhas,  have  but  to  see  and  hear  me  to  put  trust 


*  Suvij-odhaka/^.     The  rendering  doubtful ;  see  next  note. 

2  Su^fodhaka.  This,  as  well  as  suvijodhaka,  properly  means 
'  well  cleaning,'  and  applies,  at  least  originally,  to  servants  or  pupils 
who  are  charged  with  sweeping  the  house  or  precincts.  I  have 
tried  to  give  the  expression  a  spiritual  look ;  Burnouf  renders  it  by 
'  faciles  a  purifier,'  which  is  quite  plausible,  because  in  a  similar 
compound,  subodha,  we  find  bodha  used  in  a  passive  sense, 
the  word  meaning  '  easy  to  be  understood.' 

^  Na  ka.  khedaw  ^anayanti  vii'odhyamanas. 


286  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARiKA.  XIV. 

in  me,  to  understand  and  fathom  the  Buddha-know- 
ledge. And  those  who  fulfilled  their  duties  in  the 
stage  of  disciples  have  now  been  introduced  by  me 
into  Buddha-knowledge  and  well  instructed  in  the 
highest  truth. 

And  at  that  time  the  Bodhisattvas  Mahasattvas 
uttered  the  following  stanzas: 

3.  Excellent,  excellent,  O  great  Hero !  we  are 
happy  to  hear  that  those  creatures  are  decorous, 
docile,  well  performing  their  duty^ ; 

4.  And  that  they  listen  to  thy  profound  know- 
ledge, O  Leader,  and  that  after  listening  to  it  they 
have  put  trust  in  it  and  understand  it. 

This  said,  the  Lord  declared  his  approval  to  the 
four  Bodhisattvas  Mahasattvas  who  were  at  the  head 
of  that  great  host,  that  great  multitude  of  Bodhi- 
sattvas Mahasattvas,  saying :  Well  done,  young  men 
of  good  family,  well  done,  that  you  so  congratulate 
the  Tathagata. 

And  at  that  moment  the  following  thought  arose 
in  the  mind  of  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Maitreya 
and  the  eight  hundred  thousand  myriads  of  ko/is  of 
Bodhisattvas  similar  to  the  sands  of  the  river  Ganges^ : 
We  never  yet  saw  so  great  a  host,  so  great  a  multi- 
tude of  Bodhisattvas ;  we  never  yet  heard  of  such 
a  multitude,  that  after  issuing  from  the  gaps  of  the 
earth  has  stood  in  the  presence  of  the  Lord  to 
honour,  respect,  venerate,  worship  him  and  greet 
him  with  joyful  shouts ^  Whence  have  these  Bodhi- 
sattvas Mahisattvas  flocked  hither  ? 

^  Sujodhaka;  cf.  above. 

^  Ash/ana»z  Gahganadivalikopamanawi  Bodhisatvako/inayutasa- 
tasahasra«a»/.    Burnouf  renders, '  a  celui  des  sables  de  huit  Ganges.' 
^  Pratisammodante. 


XrV.  ISSUING    OF    BODHISATTVAS.  287 

Then  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Maitreya,  feel- 
ing within  himself  doubt  and  perplexity,  and  inferring 
from  his  own  thoughts  those  of  the  eight  hundred 
thousand  myriads  of  ko^is  of  Bodhisattvas  similar  to 
the  sands  of  the  river  Ganges,  stretched  out  his 
joined  hands  towards  the  Lord  and  questioned  him 
about  the  matter  by  uttering  the  following  stanzas : 

5.  Here  are  many  thousand  myriads  of  ko^is  of 
Bodhisattvas,  numberless,  whom  we  never  saw 
before ;  tell  us,  O  supreme  of  men ! 

6.  Whence  and  how  do  these  mighty  persons 
come  ?  Whence  have  they  come  here  under  the 
form  of  great  bodies*  ? 

7.  All  are  great  Seers,  wise  and  strong  in  memory, 
whose  outward  appearance  is  lovely  to  see ;  whence 
have  they  come  ? 

8.  And  each  of  those  Bodhisattvas,  O  Lord  of 
the  world,  has  an  immense  train,  like  the  sands 
of  the  Ganges. 

9.  The  train  of  (each)  glorious  Bodhisattva  is 
equal  to  the  sands  of  sixty  Ganges  in  fulP.  All  are 
striving  after  enlightenment. 

10.  Of  such  heroes  and  mighty  possessors  of  a 
troop  the  followers  are  equal  to  the  sands  of  sixty 
Ganges  ^ 


^  The  rendering  is  doubtful;  the  text  has  mahatmabhava- 
rfipewa. 

^  Gahgavalikasama  shash/i  paripur«7/a  yasasvina^,  parivaro  Bo- 
dhisatvasya.  It  is  in  the  teeth  of  grammar  to  render  the  passage 
in  this  way,  but  from  the  following  we  must  infer  that  no  other 
translation  will  suit  the  case. 

^  The  translation  is  uncertain ;  the  text  has  eva;«  rfipawa  virawaw 
varshavantana  tayinaw,  shash/ir  eva  prama^/ena  Gahgavalika  ime. 
Instead  of  varshavantana  I  would  read  vargavantana,  which 


288  SADDHARMA-PUJVDARIKA.  XTV. 

11.  There  are  others,  still  more  numerous,  with 
an  unlimited  train,  like  the  sands  of  fifty,  forty,  and 
thirty  Ganges  ; 

12,  13.  Who  have  a  train  equal  to  the  (sands 
of)  twenty  Ganges.  Still  more  numerous  are  the 
mighty  sons  of  Buddha,  who  have  each  a  train  (equal 
to  the  sands)  of  ten,  of  five  Ganges.  Whence,  O 
Leader,  has  such  an  assembly  flocked  hither  ? 

14.  There  are  others  who  have  each  a  train  of 
pupils  and  companions  equal  to  the  sands  of  four, 
three,  or  two  Ganges. 

15.  There  are  others  more  numerous  yet;  it 
would  be  impossible  to  calculate  their  number  in 
thousands  of  ko^is  of  ^^ons. 

16.  (Equal  to)  a  half  Ganges,  one  third,  one 
tenth,  one  twentieth,  is  the  train  of  those  heroes, 
those  mighty  Bodhisattvas. 

1 7.  There  are  yet  others  who  are  incalculable ; 
it  would  be  impossible  to  count  them  even  in  hun- 
dreds of  ko/is  of  ^ons. 

18.  Many  more  yet  there  are,  with  endless  trains  ; 
they  have  in  their  attendance  ko/is,  and  ko/is  and 
again  ko/is,  and  also  half  ko/is. 

19.  Other  great  Seers  again,  beyond  computa- 
tion, very  wise  Bodhisattvas  are  seen  in  a  respectful 
posture. 

20.  They  have  a  thousand,  a  hundred,  or  fifty 
attendants  ;  in  hundreds  of  ko/is  of  ^ons  one  would 
not  be  able  to  count  them. 

21.  The  suite  of  (some  of  these)  heroes  consists 
of  twenty,  of  ten,  five,  four,  three,  or  two  ;  those  are 
countless. 

Burnouf  seems  to   have  had  before  him,  for  his  translation  has 
'  suivis  chacun  de  leur  assemblde.' 


XIV.  ISSUING    OF    BODHISATTVAS.  289 

2  2.  As  to  those  who  are  walking  alone  and  come 
to  their  rest  alone,  they  have  now  flocked  hither  in 
such  numbers  as  to  be  beyond  computation. 

23.  Even  if  one  with  a  magic  wand  in  his  hand 
would  try  for  a  number  of  y^ons  equal  to  the  sands  of 
theGangesto  count  them,  he  would  not  reach  the  term. 

24.  Where  do  all  those  noble,  energetic  heroes, 
those  mighty  Bodhisattvas,  come  from? 

25.  Who  has  taught  them  the  law  (or  duty)  ?  and 
by  whom  have  they  been  destined  to  enlightenment  ? 
Whose  command  do  they  accept  ?  Whose  command 
do  they  keep  ? 

26.  Bursting  forth  at  all  points  of  the  horizon 
through  the  whole  extent  of  the  earth  they  emerge, 
those  great  Sages  endowed  with  magical  faculty  and 
wisdom. 

27.  This  world  on  every  side  is  being  perforated, 
O  Seer,  by  the  wise  Bodhisattvas,  who  at  this  time 
are  emergfingf. 

2S.  Never  before  have  we  seen  anything  like 
this.     Tell  us  the  name  of  this  world,  O  Leader. 

29.  We  have  repeatedly  roamed  in  all  directions 
of  space,  but  never  saw  these  Bodhisattvas. 

30.  We  never  saw  a  single  infant^  of  thine,  and 
now,  on  a  sudden,  these  appear  to  us.  Tell  us  their 
history,  O  Seer. 

31.  Hundreds,  thousands,  ten  thousands  of  Bodhi- 
sattvas, all  equally  filled  with  curiosity,  look  up  to 
the  highest  of  men. 

32.  Explain  to  us,  O  incomparable,  great  hero,  who 
knowest  no  bounds^,  where  do  these  heroes,  these 
wise  Bodhisattvas,  come  from  ? 

^  Stanapa. 

^  Niravadhe,  which  I  identify  with  Sansk.  niravadhe,  the  voc. 


290  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARiKA.  XIV. 


Meanwhile  the  Tathagatas,  &c.,  who  had  flocked 
from  hundred  thousands  of  myriads  of  ko/is  of  workls, 
they,  the  creations  of  the  Lord  6'akyamuni,  who  were 
preaching  the  law  to  the  beings  in  other  worlds ;  who 
all  around^  the  Lord  ^'akyamuni,  the  Tathagata,  &c., 
were  seated  with  crossed  legs  on  magnificent  jewel 
thrones 2  at  the  foot  of  jewel  trees  in  every  direction 
of  space ;  as  well  as  the  satellites  of  those  Tatha- 
gatas were  struck  with  wonder  and  amazement  at 
the  sight  of  that  great  host,  that  great  multitude  of 
Bodhisattvas  emerging  from  the  gaps  of  the  earth 
and  established  in  the  element  of  ether,  and  they 
(the   satellites)   asked    each    their  own    Tathagata : 
Where,  O   Lord,  do  so  many  Bodhisattvas  Maha- 
sattvas,  so  innumerable,  so  countless,  come  from  ? 
Whereupon  those  Tathagatas,  &c.,  answered  sever- 
ally to  their  satellites  :  Wait  awhile,  young  men  of 
good    family;    this    Bodhisattva    Mahasattva    here, 
called   Maitreya,  has  just  received  from   the   Lord 
^'akyamuni  a  revelation  about  his  destiny  to  supreme, 
perfect  enlightenment.    He  has  questioned  the  Lord 
^'akyamuni,  the  Tathagata,  &c.,  about  the  matter, 
and    the   Lord   .Sakyamuni,   the   Tathagata,  &c.,  is 
going  to  explain  it ;  then  you  may  hear. 

Thereupon  the  Lord  addressed  the  Bodhisattva 
Maitreya :  Well  done,  A^ita,  well  done ;  it  is  a 
sublime  subject,  A^ita,  about  which  thou  questionest 
me.  Then  the  Lord  addressed  the  entire  host  of 
Bodhisattvas :  Be  attentive  all,  young  men  of  good 


case  of  niravadhi.     Burnouf  has,  'toi  qui  es  affranchi  de  I'accu- 
mulation  [des  Elements  constitutifs  de  I'existence].' 

^  Samantad;  Burnoul's  'en  presence'  is  wanting  in  my  MS. 

^  Or,  thrones  of  magnificent  jewels. 


XIV.  ISSUING    OF   BODHISATTVAS.  29 1 

family ;  be  well  prepared  and  steady  on  your  post, 
you  and  the  entire  host  of  Bodhisattvas  ;  the  Tatha- 
gata,  the  Arhat,  &c.,  is  now  going  to  exhibit  the 
sight  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Tathagata,  young  men 
of  good  family,  the  leadership  of  the  Tathagata,  the 
work  of  the  Tathagata,  the  sport  ^  of  the  Tathagata, 
the  might  of  the  Tathagata,  the  energy  of  the 
Tathagata, 

And  on  that  occasion  the  Lord  pronounced  the 
following  stanzas : 

T,^.  Be  attentive  all,  young  men  of  good  family ; 
I  am  to  utter  an  infallible  word ;  refrain  from  dis- 
puting ^  about  it,  O  sages  :  the  science  of  the  Tatha- 
gata is  beyond  reasoning. 

34.  Be  all  steady  and  thoughtful ;  continue  atten- 
tive all.  To-day  you  will  hear  a  law  as  yet  unknown, 
the  W'Onder  of  the  Tathagatas. 

35.  Never  have  any  doubt,  ye  sages,  for  I  shall 
strengthen  you,  I  am  the  Leader  who  speaketh  in- 
fallible truth,  and  my  knowledge  is  unlimited. 

36.  Profound  are  the  laws  known  to  the  Sugata, 
above  reasoning  and  beyond  argumentation.  These 
laws  I  am  going  to  reveal ;  ye,  hear  which  and  how 
they  are. 

After  uttering  these  stanzas  the  Lord  addressed 
the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Maitreya :  I  announce 
to  thee,  A^ita,  I  declare  to  thee:  These  Bodhisattvas 
Mahasattvas,  A^ita,  so  innumerable,  incalculable, 
inconceivable,  incomparable,  uncountable,  whom  you 
never  saw  before,  who  just  now  have  issued  from 

^  I.e.  magic  display  of  creative  power,  lila,  synonymous  with 
maya. 

2  Vivada,  the  original  reading,  though  afterwards  effaced  and 
replaced  by  vishada,  despondency. 

U    2 


292  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARiKA.  XFV 


the  gaps  of  the  earth,  these  Bodhisattvas  Maha- 
sattvas,  A^ita,  have  I  roused,  excited,  animated, 
fully  developed  to  supreme,  perfect  enlightenment 
after  my  having  arrived  at  supreme,  perfect  en- 
lightenment in  this  world.  I  have,  moreover,  fully 
matured,  established,  confirmed,  instructed,  per- 
fected these  young  men  of  good  family  in  their 
Bodhisattvaship.  And  these  Bodhisattvas  Maha- 
sattvas,  A^ita,  occupy  in  this  Saha-world  the  domain 
of  the  ether-element  below.  Only  thinking  of  the 
lesson  they  have  to  study,  and  devoted  to  thoroughly 
comprehend  it,  these  young  men  of  good  family 
have  no  liking  for  social  gatherings,  nor  for  bustling 
crowds ;  they  do  not  put  off  their  tasks,  and  are 
strenuous  ^  These  young  men  of  good  family, 
A^ita,  delight  in  seclusion  ^  are  fond  of  seclusion. 
These  young  men  of  good  family  do  not  dwell  in 
the  immediate  vicinity  of  gods  and  men,  they  not 
being  fond  of  bustling  crowds.  These  young  men 
of  good  family  find  their  luxury  in  the  pleasure 
of  the  law,  and  apply  themselves  to  Buddha- 
knowledge. 

And  on  that  occasion  the  Lord  uttered  the  follow- 
ing stanzas  : 

2)^].  These  Bodhisattvas,  immense,  inconceivable 
and  beyond  measure,  endowed  with  magic  power, 
wisdom,  and  learning,  have  progressed  in  knowledge 
for  many  ko/is  of  ^ons. 

38.   It  is  I  who  have  brought  them  to  maturity 
for  enlightenment,  and  it  is  in  my  field   that  they 

^  It  will  be  remarked  that  these  Bodhisattvas  are  represented  as 
pupils  or  young  monks  under  training,  ^ramaweras. 

■  Vivekarama/z;  viveka  at  the  same  time  means  'discri- 
mination.' 


XIV.  ISSUING    OF    BODHISATTVAS.  293 

have  their  abode;  by  me  alone  have  they  been  brought 
to  maturity ;  these  Bodhisattvas  are  my  sons. 

39.  All  have  devoted  themselves  to  a  hermit 
life^  and  are  assiduous  in  shunning  places  of  bustle  ; 
they  walk  detached,  these  sons  of  mine,  following 
my  precepts  in  their  lofty  course. 

40.  They  dwell  in  the  domain  of  ether,  in  the 
lower  portion  of  the  field,  those  heroes  who,  un- 
wearied, are  striving  day  and  night  to  attain  superior 
knowledge. 

41.  All  strenuous,  of  good  memory,  unshaken  in 
the  immense  strength  of  their  intelligence,  those 
serene  sages  preach  the  law,  all  radiant,  as  being 
my  sons. 

42.  Since  the  time  when  I  reached  this  superior 
(or  foremost)  enlightenment,  at  the  town  of  Gaya, 
at  the  foot  of  the  tree,  and  put  in  motion  the  all- 
surpassing  wheel  of  the  law,  I  have  brought  to 
maturity  all  of  them  for  superior  enlightenment. 

43.  These  words  I  here  speak  are  faultless,  really 
true ;  believe  me,  all  of  you  who  hear  me  :  verily,  I 
have  reached  superior  enlightenment,  and  it  is  by 
me  alone  that  all  have  been  brought  to  maturity. 

The  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Maitreya  and  those 
numerous  hundred  thousands  of  myriads  of  ko/'is  of 
Bodhisattvas  were  struck  with  wonder,  amazement, 
and  surprise,  (and  thought):  How  is  it  possible  that 
within  so  short  a  moment,  within  the  lapse  of  so 
short  a  time  so  many  Bodhisattvas,  so  countless, 
have  been  roused  and  made  fully  ripe  to  reach 
supreme,  perfect  enlightenment  ?     Then  the  Bodhi- 


^  Ara«yadliutabhiyukta;  ar a «yadhuta,  essentially  the  same 
as  Pali  ara?ifiakanga,  is  one  of  the  thirteen  Dhutahgas. 


294  SADDHARMA-PUA^DARIKA.  XIV. 


sattva  Mahasattva  Maitreya  asked  the  Lord  :  How 
then,  O  Lord,  has  the  Tathagata,  after  he  left,  when 
a  prince  royal,  Kapilavastu,  the  town  of  the  ^'akyas, 
arrived  at  supreme,  perfect  enlightenment  on  the 
summit  of  the  terrace  of  enlightenment,  not  far  from 
the  town  of  Gaya,  somewhat  more  than  forty  years 
since,  O  Lord  ?  How  then  has  the  Lord,  the  Tatha- 
gata, within  so  short  a  lapse  of  time,  been  able  to 
perform  the  endless  task  of  a  Tathagata,  to  exer- 
cise the  leadership  of  a  Tathagata,  the  energy  of  a 
Tathagata  ?  How  has  the  Tathagata,  within  so  short 
a  time,  been  able  to  rouse  and  bring  to  maturity  for 
supreme,  perfect  enlightenment  this  host  of  Bodhi- 
sattvas,  this  multitude  of  Bodhisattvas,  a  multitude 
so  great  that  it  would  be  impossible  to  count  the 
whole  of  it,  even  if  one  were  to  continue  countine 
for  hundred  thousands  of  myriads  of  ko/is  of  yEons  ? 
These  Bodhisattvas,  so  innumerable,  O  Lord,  so 
countless,  having  long  followed  a  spiritual  course 
of  life  and  planted  roots  of  goodness  under  many 
hundred  thousands  of  Buddhas,  have  in  the  course 
of  many  hundred  thousands  of  ^ons  become  finally 
ripe. 

It  is  just  as  if  some  man,  young  and  youthful,  a 
young  man  with  black  hair  and  in  the  prime  of  youth, 
twenty-five  years  of  age,  would  represent  cente- 
narians as  his  sons,  and  say:  '  Here,  young  men  of 
good  family,  you  see  my  sons;'  and  if  those  cen- 
tenarians would  declare  :  '  This  is  the  father  who 
begot  us.'  Now,  Lord,  the  speech  of  that  man 
would  be  incredible,  hard  to  be  believed  by  the 
public.  It  is  the  same  case  with  the  Tathagata, 
who  but  lately  has  arrived  at  supreme,  perfect 
enlightenment,  and  with  these  Bodhisattvas  Maha- 


XTV.  ISSUING    OF    BODHISATTVAS.  295 

sattvas,  so  immense  in  number,  who  for  many  hun- 
dred thousand  myriads  of  ko/is  of  ^ons,  having 
observed  a  spiritual  course  of  Hfe,  have  long  since 
come  to  certainty  in  regard  to  Tathagata-knowledge  ; 
who  are  able  to  plunge  in  and  again  rise  from  the 
hundred  thousand  sorts  of  meditation^;  who  are 
adepts  at  the  preparatories  to  noble  transcendent 
wisdom,  have  accomplished  the  preparatories  to 
noble  transcendent  wisdom^;  who  are  clever  on  the 
Buddha-ground,  able  in  the  (ecclesiastical)  Council 
and  in  Tathagata  duties ;  who  are  the  wonder"  and 
admiration  of  the  world  ;  who  are  possessed  of  great 
vigour,  strength,  and  power.  And  the  Lord  says  : 
From  the  very  beginning  have  I  roused,  brought  to 
maturity,  fully  developed  them  to  be  fit  for  this 
Bodhisattva  position.  It  is  I  who  have  displayed  this 
energy  and  vigour  after  arriving  at  supreme,  perfect 
enlightenment.  But,  O  Lord,  how  can  we  have  faith 
in  the  words  of  the  Tathagata,  when  he  says  :  The 
Tathagata  speaks  infallible  truth  ?  The  Tathagata 
must  know  that  the  Bodhisattvas  who  have  newly 
entered  the  vehicle  are  apt  to  fall  into  doubt  on 
this  head ;  after  the  extinction  of  the  Tathagata 
those  who  hear  this  Dharmaparyaya  will  not  accept, 
not  believe,  not  trust  it.  Hence,  O  Lord,  they  will 
design  acts  tending  to  the  ruin  of  the  law.  There- 
fore, O  Lord,  deign  to  explain  us  this  matter,  that 
we  may  be  free  from  perplexity,  and  that  the  Bodhi- 
sattvas who  in  future  shall  hear  it,  be  they  young 

^  Samadhimukhajatasahasrasamapadyanavyutthanaku- 
jalah.  I  suppose  that  for  mukha,  point,  principal  point,  side,  face, 
we  have  to  read  sukha,  ecstasy. 

-  Mahabhi^waparikarmaniryata  mahabhi^jlakr/taparikannawa/^. 

^  Paw^ita  Buddhabhixmau  sahgitikujala^,  Tathagatadharmawaw. 


296  SADDHARMA-PUiVZJARIKA.  XIV. 

men  of  good  family  or  young  ladies,  may  not  fall 
into  doubt. 

On  that  occasion  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva 
Maitreya  addressed  the  Lord  with  the  following 
stanzas  : 

44.  When  thou  wert  born  in  Kapilavastu,  the 
home  of  the  ^'akyas,  thou  didst  leave  it  and  reach 
enlightenment  at  the  town  of  Gaya^  That  is  a 
short  time  ago,  O  Lord  of  the  world. 

45.  And  now  thou  hast  so  great  a  crowd  of 
followers,  these  sages  who  for  many  ko/is  of  yEons 
have  fulfilled  their  duties,  stood  firm  in  magic  power, 
unshaken,  well  disciplined,  accomplished  in  the  might 
of  wisdom  ; 

46.  These,  who  are  untainted  as  the  lotus  is  by 
water ;  who  to-day  have  flocked  hither  after  rending 
the  earth,  and  are  standing  all  with  joined  hands, 
respectful  and  strong  in  memory,  the  sons  of  the 
Master  of  the  world  ■^. 

47.  How  will  these  Bodhisattvas  believe  this  great 
wonder  ?  Expel  (all)  doubt,  tell  the  cause,  and  show 
how  the  matter  really  is. 

^  The  succint  form  in  which  the  events  of  the  legendary  life  of 
the  6'akya  prince  are  told  is  remarkable,  especially  if  we  bear  in 
mind  that  the  first  going  out  (nishkramawa)  of  a  young  boy 
(kumara)  usually  takes  place  four  months  after  his  birth  ;  the  rite 
of 'giving  rice  food,'  annaprai'ana,  takes  place  in  the  sixth  month  ; 
this  rite  has  its  counterpart  in  Su^ata's  providing  Gautama  with  milk 
porridge  and  honey.  Another  rite,  that  of  shaving  the  hair  with 
the  exception  of  a  tuft  on  the  crown,  the  /^urt'akarman,  commonly 
follows  the  annapra^ana;  in  the  case  of  Gautama,  however,  it  is 
represented  to  be  subsequent  on  the  kumara  having  left  his  home. 
In  so  far  as  he  cut  off  his  hair  at  the  time  of  his  entering  a  spiritual 
life,  the  act  agrees  with  the  /^u^/akarman  at  the  upanayana  or 
initiation  of  boys. 

""  Lokadhipatisya  putra/z. 


XIV.  ISSUING    OF    BODlllSATTVAS.  297 

48.  It  is  as  if  there  were  some  man,  a  young  man 
with  black  hair,  twenty  years  old  or  somewhat  more, 
who  presented  as  his  sons  some  centenarians, 

49.  And  the  latter,  covered  with  wrinkles  and 
grey-haired,  declared  the  (young)  man  to  be  their 
father.  But  such  (a  young  man)  never  having  sons 
of  such  appearance,  it  would  be  difficult  to  believe, 
O  Lord  of  the  world,  that  they  were  sons  to  so  young 
a  man. 

50.  In  the  same  manner,  O  Lord,  we  are  unable  to 
conceive  how  these  numerous  Bodhisattvas  of  good 
memory  and  excelling  in  wisdom,  who  have  been 
well  instructed  during  thousands  of  ko/is  of  yEons  ; 

51.  Who  are  firm,  of  keen  intelligence,  lovely  and 
agreeable  to  sight,  free  from  hesitation  in  the  deci- 
sions on  law,  praised  by  the  Leaders  of  the  world  ; 

52.  Who  in  freedom  live  in  the  wood^;  who  un- 
attached in  the  element  of  ether  constantly  display 
their  energy,  who  are  the  sons  of  Sugata  striving 
after  this  Buddha-ground ; 

53.  How  will  this  be  believed  when  the  Leader  of 
the  world  shall  be  completely  extinct  ?  After  hearing 
it  from  the  Lord's  own  mouth  we  shall  never  more 
feel  any  doubt. 

54.  May  Bodhisattvas  never  come  to  grief  by 
having  doubt  on  this  head.  Grant  us,  O  Lord,  a 
truthful  account  how  these  Bodhisattvas  have  been 
brought  to  maturity  by  thee. 

^  Vane,  which,  especially  in  the  more  ancient  language,  also 
means  a  cloud,  the  region  of  clouds. 


298  SADDHARMA-PLWDARIKA.  XV 


CHAPTER   XV. 

DURATION    OF    LIFE    OF    THE    TATHAGATA. 

Thereupon  the  Lord  addressed  the  entire  host  of 
Bodhisattvas  :  Trust  me,  young  men  of  good  family, 
believe  in  the  Tathagata  speaking  a  veracious  word. 
A  second  time  the  Lord  addressed  the  Bodhisattvas  : 
Trust  me,  young  gentlemen  of  good  family,  believe 
in  the  Tathagata  speaking  a  veracious  word.  A 
third  and  last  time  the  Lord  addressed  the  Bodhi- 
sattvas :  Trust  me,  young  men  of  good  family,  be- 
lieve in  the  Tathagata  speaking  a  veracious  word. 
Then  the  entire  host  of  Bodhisattvas  with  Maitreya, 
the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  at  their  head,  stretched 
out  the  joined  hands  and  said  to  the  Lord:  Expound 
this  matter,  O  Lord  ;  expound  it,  O  Sugata  ;  we  will 
believe  in  the  word  of  the  Tathagata.  A  second 
time  the  entire  host,  &c.  &c.  A  third  time  the 
entire  host,  &c.  &c. 

The  Lord,  considering  that  the  Bodhisattvas  re- 
peated their  prayer  up  to  three  times,  addressed 
them  thus  :  Listen  then,  young  men  of  good  family. 
The  force  of  a  strong  resolve  which  I  assumed ^  is 
such,  young  men  of  good  family,  that  this  world, 
including  gods,  men,  and  demons,  acknowledges : 
Now  has  the  Lord  ^akyamuni,  after  going  out  from 
the  home  of  the  ^'akyas,  arrived  at  supreme,  per- 
fect enlightenment,  on  the  summit  of  the  terrace  of 


^  Or,  the  power  of  supremacy  which  forms  my  attribute,  mama- 
dhishZ/^anabaladhanam. 


XV.         DURATION    OF    LIFE    OF    THE    TATHAGATA.         299 

enlightenment  at  the  town  of  Gay^.  But,  young  men 
of  good  family,  the  truth  is  that  many  hundred  thou- 
sand myriads  of  ko/is  of  ^ons  ago  I  have  arrived 
at  supreme,  perfect  enlightenment.  By  way  of  ex- 
ample, young  men  of  good  family,  let  there  be  the 
atoms  of  earth  of  fifty  hundred  thousand  myriads  of 
ko^'is  of  worlds ;  let  there  exist  some  man  who  takes 
one  of  those  atoms  of  dust  and  then  goes  in  an 
eastern  direction  fifty  hundred  thousand  myriads  of 
ko/is  of  worlds  further  on,  there  to  deposit  that  atom 
of  dust ;  let  in  this  manner  the  man  carry  away  from 
all  those  worlds  the  whole  mass  of  earth,  and  in  the 
same  manner,  and  by  the  same  act  as  supposed,  de- 
posit all  those  atoms  in  an  eastern  direction-.  Now, 
would  you  think,  young  men  of  good  family,  that 
any  one  should  be  able  to  imagine,  weigh,  count,  or 
determine  (the  number  of)  those  worlds  ?  The  Lord 
having  thus  spoken,  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva 
Maitreya  and  the  entire  host  of  Bodhisattvas  re- 
plied: They  are  incalculable,  O  Lord,  those  worlds, 
countless,  beyond  the  range  of  thought.  Not  even 
all  the  disciples  and  Pratyekabuddhas,  O  Lord,  with 
their  Arya-knowledge,  will  be  able  to  imagine,  weigh, 
count,  or  determine  them.  For  us  also,  O  Lord, 
who  are  Bodhisattvas  standing  on  the  place  from 
whence  there  is  no  turning  back,  this  point  lies 
beyond  the  sphere  of  our  comprehension  ;  so  innu- 
merable, O  Lord,  are  those  worlds. 

This  said,  the  Lord  spoke  to  those  Bodhisattvas 
Mahasattvas  as  follows :  I  announce  to  you,  young  men 
of  good  family,  I  declare  to  you:  However  numerous 

*  This  passage  is  a  repetition,  in  shorter  form,  of  what  is  found 
in  chapter  VH  ;  see  p.  153. 


SADDHARMA-PUA^DARIKA.  XV. 


be  those  worlds  where  that  man  deposits  those  atoms 
of  dust  and  where  he  does  not,  there  are  not,  young 
men  of  good  family,  in  all  those  hundred  thousands 
of  myriads  of  ko/is  of  worlds  so  many  dust  atoms  as 
there  are  hundred  thousands  of  myriads  of  ko^is  of 
^ons  since  I  have  arrived  at  supreme,  perfect  en-: 
lightenment^  From  the  moment,  young  men  of  good 
family,  when  I  began  preaching  the  law  to  crea- 
tures in  this  Saha-world  and  in  hundred  thousands 
of  myriads  of  koz'is  of  other  worlds,  and  (when)  the 
other  Tathagatas,  Arhats,  &c.,  such  as  the  Tatha- 
gata  Diparikara  and  the  rest  whom  I  have  mentioned 
in  the  lapse  of  time  (preached),  (from  that  moment) 
have  I,  young  men  of  good  family,  for  the  com- 
plete Nirva;2a  of  those  Tathagatas,  &c.,  created  all 
that  with  the  express  view  to  skilfully  preach 
the  law-.  Again,  young  men  of  good  family,  the 
Tathagata,  considering  the  different  degrees  of 
faculty    and    strength    of    succeeding    generations, 


'  ^'akyamuni  here  declares,  in  the  most  emphatic  manner,  not 
only  that  he  has  existed  from  eternity,  but  that  he  is  the  All-wise, 
the  Buddha  from  the  beginning.  The  world  thinks  that  he  has 
become  all-wise  at  Gaya,  a  short  time  before,  but  in  reality  he  has 
been  the  All-wise  from  eternity.  In  other  words,  the  meaning  of 
his  being  a  common  man  who  had  reached  enlightenment  under 
the  Bodhi-tree  near  Gaya,  is  declared  by  himself  to  be  a  delusion. 
Further,  it  will  be  remarked  that  ^Sakvamuni  and  the  Tathagata 
Mahabhi^fia^fianabhibhu  in  chapter  VII  are  identical,  though  appa- 
rently diversified. 

'^  Tesha/;/  ka.  Tathagatanam  Arhata»i  samyaksambuddhanaw 
parinirvawaya  mayaiva  tani,  kulaputra,  upayakau.yalyadharmade- 
.yanaya  (abhi)  nirharanirmitani.  Burnouf  translates  as  if  he  read 
te — °nirmita//,  so  that  '  those  Tathagatas — have  been  created.' 
Both  readings  come  essendally  to  the  same ;  in  either  case  .Sakya- 
muni  is  the  creator,  the  really  existing  being ;  the  other  Tathagatas 
are  emanations  from  him  or  apparent  beings. 


XV.  DURATION    OF    LIFE    OF    THE    TATHAGATA.        3OI 

reveals  at  each  (generation)  his  own  name,  reveals 
a  state  in  which  Nirva//a  has  not  yet  been  reached ^ 
and  in  different  ways  he  satisfies  the  wants  of 
(different)  creatures  through  various  Dharmapar- 
yayas^.  This  being  the  case,  young  men  of  good 
family,  the  Tathagata  declares  to  the  creatures, 
whose  dispositions  are  so  various  and  who  possess 
so  few  roots  of  goodness,  so  many  evil  propensities  : 
I  am  young  of  age,  monks ;  having  left  my  father's 
home,  monks,  I  have  lately  arrived  at  supreme,  per- 
fect enlightenment ^  When,  however,  the  Tathagata, 
who  so  long  ago  arrived  at  perfect  enlightenment, 
declares  himself  to  have  but  lately  arrived  at  perfect 
enlightenment,  he  does  so  in  order  to  lead  creatures 
to  full  ripeness  and  make  them  go  in.  Therefore 
have  these  Dharmaparyayas  been  revealed  ;  and  it 
is  for  the  education  of  creatures,  young  men  of  good 
family,  that  the  Tathagata  has  revealed  all  Dhar- 
maparyayas. And,  young  men  of  good  famil}',  the 
word  that  the  Tathagata  delivers  on  behalf  of  the 
education  of  creatures,  either  under  his  own  appear- 
ance or  under  another's,  either  on  his  own  authority* 
or  under  the  mask^  of  another,  all  that  the  Tatha- 

1  Instead  of  the  last  clause  we  find  in  the  margin, '  reveals  (or 
declares)  at  each  his  own  Nirvawa.'  The  material  difference  is 
slight,  for  the  temporal  appearances  of  the  everlasting  being  are 
final  and  multifarious,  but  the  being  itself  is  one  and  everlasting. 
6'ak.yamuni  is,  in  reality,  the  one  and  everlasting  brahma. 

2  The  Tathagata,  in  his  proper  being  well  understood,  is  not 
only  the  Devatideva,  the  supreme  god  of  gods,  of  Buddhism,  but 
of  all  religions  in  the  world ;  from  him  are  all  scriptures. 

^  In  various  periods  mankind  wants  renewed  revelation ;  hence 
Vishwu,  for  Dharma's  sake,  descends  on  earth. 

*  Atmarambanena  (sic),  properly,  on  his  own  base. 

^  Aparavarawena.  One  may  also  render  it  by  'under  the 
cloak  of  another.' 


SADDHARMA-PUiVi)ARiKA.  XV. 


gata  declares,  all  those  Dharmaparyiyas  spoken  by 
the  Tathagata  are  true.  There  can  be  no  question 
of  untruth  from  the  part  of  the  Tathagata  in  this 
respect.  For  the  Tathagata  sees  the  triple  world 
as  it  really  is :  it  is  not  born,  it  dies  not ;  it  is  not 
conceived,  it  springs  not  into  existence ;  it  moves 
not  in  a  whirl,  it  becomes  not  extinct ;  it  is  not  real, 
nor  unreal ;  it  is  not  existing,  nor  non-existing ;  it  is 
not  such,  nor  otherwise^,  nor  false.  The  Tathagata 
sees  the  triple  world,  not  as  the  ignorant,  common 
people,  he  seeing  things  always  present  to  him ; 
indeed,  to  the  Tathagata,  in  his  position,  no  laws 
are  concealed.  In  that  respect  any  word  that  the 
Tathagata  speaks  is  true,  not  false.  But  in  order 
to  produce  the  roots  of  goodness  in  the  creatures, 
who  follow  different  pursuits  and  behave  according 
to  different  notions,  he  reveals  various  Dharma- 
paryayas  with  various  fundamental  principles.  The 
Tathagata  then,  young  men  of  good  family,  does 
what  he  has  to  do.  The  Tathagata  who  so  long 
ago  was  perfectly  enlightened  is  unlimited  in  the 
duration  of  his  life,  he  is  everlasting.  Without 
being  extinct,  the  Tathagata  makes  a  show  of  ex- 
tinction, on  behalf  of  those  who  have  to  be  educated. 
And  even  now,  young  gentlemen  of  good  family, 
I  have  not  accomplished  my  ancient  Bodhisattva- 
course,  and  the  measure  of  my  lifetime  is  not  full. 
Nay,  young  men  of  good  family,  I  shall  yet  have 
twice  as  many  hundred  thousand  myriads  of  ko/is 
of  yEons  before  the  measure  of  my  lifetime  be  full^. 


^  Or,  it  is  not  as  it  ought  to  be,  nor  wrong. 
'^  Virtually  he  has  existed  from  the  very  beginning,  from  an  infi- 
nite period  ;  infinity  multiplied  by  two  remains  infinity. 


XV.  DURATION    OF    LIFE    OF    THE    TATHAGATA.        303 

I  announce  final  extinction,  young  men  of  good 
family,  though  myself  I  do  not  become  finally  ex- 
tinct ^  For  in  this  way,  young  men  of  good  family, 
I  bring  (all)  creatures  to  maturity,  lest  creatures 
in  whom  goodness  is  not  firmly  rooted,  who  are 
unholy,  miserable,  eager  of  sensual  pleasures,  blind 
and  obscured  by  the  film  of  wrong  views,  should, 
by  too  often  seeing  me,  take  to  thinking:  'The 
Tathagata  is  staying^,'  and  fancy  that  all  is  a 
child's  play^;  (lest  they)  by  thinking  'we  are  near 
that  Tathagata'  should  fail  to  exert  themselves  in 
order  to  escape  the  triple  world  and  not  conceive 
how  precious'^  the  Tathagata  is.  Hence,  young 
men  of  good  family,  the  Tathagata  skilfully  utters 
these  words :  The  apparition  of  the  Tathigatas, 
monks,  is  precious  (and  rare).  For  in  the  course 
of  many  hundred  thousand  myriads  of  ko/is  of 
i^ons  creatures  may  happen  to  see  a  Tathagata  or 
not  to  see  him^.  Therefore  and  upon  that  ground, 
young  men  of  good  family,  I  say :  The  apparition 
of  the   Tathagatas,  monks,  is   precious  (and    rare). 

^  All  this  is  perfectly  true  in  the  mouth  of  a  personification  of 
the  sun,  of  time,  of  eternity,  or  of  \6yos,  but  quite  unintelligible  in 
the  mouth  of  some  individual  of  the  human  race.  Moments  of 
time  expire,  time  never  ceases.  The  termination  of  every  day, 
month,  year,  &c.  must  remind  us  of  our  being  mortal,  and  is  a 
call  from  the  Buddha  to  us,  an  inducement  to  lead  a  virtuous  and 
holy  life. 

^  I.  e.  time  stands  still ;  we  shall  never  die. 

^  In  the  margin  added,  not  realise  the  idea  of  his  (i.  e.  time's) 
preciousness. 

*  Durlabha. 

^  Nobody  is  certain  whether  the  present  day  is  his  last  or  not; 
in  other  words,  whether  he  has  seen  the  Tathagata  for  the  last  time, 
or  shall  see  him  again  to-morrow,  &c.  Therefore  the  Tathagata 
is  so  precious. 


304  SADDHARMA-PUiVZ)ARiKA.  XV. 


By  being  more  and  more  convinced  of  the  apparition 
of  the  Tathagatas  being  precious  (or  rare)  they 
will  feel  surprised  and  sorry,  and  whilst  not  seeing 
the  Tathagata  they  will  get  a  longing  to  see  him. 
The  good  roots  developing  from  their  earnest 
thought  relating  to  the  Tathagata^  will  lastingly 
tend  to  their  weal,  benefit,  and  happiness;  in  con- 
sideration of  which  the  Tathagata  announces  final 
extinction,  though  he  himself  does  not  become  finally 
extinct,  on  behalf  of  the  creatures  who  have  to  be 
educated.  Such,  young  men  of  good  family.  Is  the 
Tathagata's  manner  of  teaching ^ ;  when  the  Tatha- 
gata speaks  in  this  way,  there  Is  from  his  part  no 
falsehood. 

Let  us  suppose  an  analogous  case,  young  men  of 
good  family.  There  is  some  physician,  learned, 
intelligent,  prudent,  clever  In  allaying  all  sorts  of 
diseases.  That  man  has  many  sons,  ten,  twenty, 
thirty,  forty,  fifty,  or  a  hundreds  The  physician 
once  beine  abroad,  all  his  children  incur  a  disease 
from  poison  or  venom.  Overcome  with  the  grievous 
pains*  caused  by  that  poison  or  venom  which  burns 
them  they  lie  rolling  on  the  ground.  Their  father, 
the  physician,  comes  home  from  his  journey  at  the 
time  when  his  sons  are  suffering  from  that  poison 
or  venom.  Some  of  them  have  perverted  notions, 
others  have  right  notions,  but  all  suffer  the  same 
pain.     On  seeing  their  father  they  cheerfully  greet 


^  I.e.  the  good  designs  germinating  in  man  when  he  is  thinking 
of  the  shortness  of  life,  the  transitoriness  of  time. 

^  De^anaparyaya. 

^  A  marginal  reading  improves  upon  the  more  ancient  text  by 
adding,  or  a  thousand. 

*  Du//khabhir  vedanabhi/^. 


XV.         DURATION    OF    LIFE    OF    THE    TATHAGATA.         305 

him  and  say :  Hail,  dear  father,  that  thou  art  come 
back  in  safety  and  welfare !  Now  deliver  us  from 
our  evil,  be  it  poison  or  venom ;  let  us  live,  dear 
father.  And  the  physician,  seeing  his  sons  befallen 
with  disease,  overcome  with  pain  and  rolling  on  the 
ground,  prepares  a  great  remedy,  having  the  required 
colour,  smell,  and  taste,  pounds  it  on  a  stone  and 
gives  it  as  a  potion  to  his  sons,  with  these  words : 
Take  this  great  remedy,  my  sons,  which  has  the 
required  colour,  smell,  and  taste.  For  by  taking 
this  great  remedy,  my  sons,  you  shall  soon  be  rid 
of  this  poison  or  venom  ;  you  shall  recover  and  be 
healthy.  Those  amongst  the  children  of  the  physi- 
cian that  have  right  notions,  after  seeing  the  colour 
of  the  remedy,  after  smelling  the  smell  and  tasting 
the  flavour,  quickly  take  it,  and  in  consequence  of  it 
are  soon  totally  delivered  from  their  disease.  But  the 
sons  who  have  perverted  notions  cheerfully  greet 
their  father  and  say  :  Hail,  dear  father,  that  thou  art 
come  back  in  safety  and  welfare ;  do  heal  us.  So 
they  speak,  but  they  do  not  take  the  remedy  offered, 
and  that  because,  owing  to  the  perverseness  of  their 
notions,  that  remedy  does  not  please  them,  in  colour, 
smell,  nor  taste.  Then  the  physician  reflects  thus : 
These  sons  of  mine  must  have  become  perverted  in 
their  notions  owing  to  this  poison  or  venom,  as  they 
do  not  take  the  remedy  nor  hail  me\  Therefore 
will  I  by  some  able  device  induce  these  sons  to  take 
this  remedy.  Prompted  by  this  desire  he  speaks  to 
those  sons  as  follows  :  I  am  old,  young  men  of  good 
family,  decrepit,  advanced  in  years,  and  my  term  of 
life  is  near  at  hand ;  but  be  not  sorry,  young  men 

^  One  would  rather  have  expected,  joyfully  accept  my  injunction. 
[21]  X 


306  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARlKA.  XV. 

of  good  family,  do  not  feel  dejected ;  here  have  I 
prepared  a  great  remedy  for  you ;  if  you  want  it, 
you  may  take  it.  Having  thus  admonished  them, 
he  skilfully  betakes  himself  to  another  part  of  the 
country  and  lets  his  sick  sons  know  that  he  has 
departed  life.  They  are  extremely  sorry  and.  bewail 
him  extremely:  So  then  he  is  dead,  our  father  and 
protector ;  he  who  begat  us ;  he,  so  full  of  bounty ! 
now  are  we  left  without  a  protector.  Fully  aware  of 
their  being  orphans  and  of  having  no  refuge,  they 
are  continually  plunged  in  sorrow,  by  which  their 
perverted  notions  make  room  for  right  notions. 
They  acknowledge  that  remedy  possessed  of  the 
required  colour,  smell,  and  taste  to  have  the  required 
colour,  smell,  and  taste,  so  that  they  instantly  take 
it,  and  by  taking  it  are  delivered  from  their  evil. 
Then,  on  knowing  that  these  sons  are  delivered 
from  evil,  the  physician  shows  himself  again.  Now, 
young  men  of  good  family,  what  is  your  opinion  ? 
Would  any  one  charge  ^  that  physician  with  falsehood 
on  account  of  his  using  that  device  ?  No,  certainly 
not.  Lord ;  certainly  not,  Sugata.  He  proceeded  : 
In  the  same  manner,  young  men  of  good  family,  I 
have  arrived  at  supreme,  perfect  enlightenment  since 
an  immense,  incalculable  number  of  hundred  thou- 
sands of  myriads  of  ko/is  of  ^ons,  but  from  time  to 
time  I  display  such  able  devices  to  the  creatures, 
with  the  view  of  educating  them,  without  there 
being  in  that  respect  any  falsehood  on  my  part. 

In  order  to  set  forth  this  subject  more  exten- 
sively the  Lord  on  that  occasion  uttered  the  fol- 
lowing stanzas : 

^^odayet;  a  would-be  correction  by  a  later  handhas  sa^zvadet. 


XV.         DURATION    OF    LIFE    OF    THE    TATHAGATA.         307 


1.  An  inconceivable  number  of  thousands  of  ko/^is 
of  ^ons,  never  to  be  measured,  is  it  since  I  reached 
superior  (or  first)  enlightenment  and  never  ceased 
to  teach  the  law. 

2.  I  roused  many  Bodhisattvas  and  established 
them  in  Buddha-knowledge.  I  brought  myriads  of 
koi?is  of  beings,  endless,  to  full  ripeness  in  many 
ko/is  of  yEons. 

3.  I  show  the  place  of  extinction,  I  reveal  to  (all) 
beines  a  device^  to  educate  them,  albeit  I  do  not 
become  extinct  at  the  time,  and  in  this  very  place 
continue  preaching  the  law. 

4.  There  I  rule  myself  as  well  as  all  beings,  1 2. 
But  men  of  perverted  minds,  in  their  delusion,  do 
not  see  me  standing  there ^ 

5.  In  the  opinion  that  my  body  is  completely 
extinct,  they  pay  worship,  in  many  ways,  to  the 
relics,  but  me  they  see  not.  They  feel  (however) 
a  certain  aspiration  by  which  their  mind  becomes 
rights 

6.  When  such  upright  (or  pious),  mild,  and 
gentle  creatures  leave  off  their  bodies,  then  I  as- 
semble the  crowd  of  disciples  and  show  myself 
here^  on  the  Gre'dhrakti/a. 

7.  And  then  I  speak  thus  to  them,  in  this  very 

1  Upayam,  It  has  been  remarked  above  that  upaya  likewise 
denotes  the  world,  the  energy  of  nature  (pra^wa). 

2  Tatraham  atmanam  adhish/Ziihami,  sarva«a  satvana  tathaiva 
kahz.?/i.  AdhishMa  is  constructed  both  with  the  accusative  case 
and  the  genitive. 

'  Tatraiva. 

*  I.  e.  .comes  into  the  right  disposition,  or  becomes  pious. 

^  This  important  word  has  been  omitted  by  Burnouf.  The 
Tathagata  represents  himself  to  be  Dharmara^a,  the  judge  of  the 
departed,  the  god  rewarding  the  pious  and  brave  after  their  death. 

X  2 


308  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARfKA.  XV. 

place  :  I  was  not  completely  extinct  at  that  time ; 
it  was  but  a  device  of  mine,  monks ;  repeatedly  am 
I  born  in  the  world  of  the  living. 

8.  Honoured  by  other  beings,  I  show  them  my 
superior  enlightenment,  but  you  would  not  obey  my 
word,  unless  the  Lord  of  the  world  enter  Nirva/za. 

9.  I  see  how  the  creatures  are  afflicted,  but  I  do 
not  show  them  my  proper  being.  Let  them  first 
have  an  aspiration  to  see  me ;  then  I  will  reveal  to 
them  the  true  law. 

10.  Such  has  always  been  my  firm  resolve  during 
an  inconceivable  number  of  thousands  of  ko/is  of 
y^ons,  and  I  have  not  left  this  Grzdhraku/a  for 
other  abodes  ^ 

11.  And  when  creatures  behold  this  world  and 
imagine  that  it  is  burning,  even  then  my  Buddha- 
field  is  teeming  with  gods  and  men. 

1 2.  They  dispose  of  manifold  amusements,  ko/is  of 
pleasure  gardens,  palaces,  and  aerial  cars  ;  (this  field) 
is  embellished  by  hills  of  gems  and  by  trees  abound- 
ing  with  blossoms  and  fruits. 

13.  And  aloft  gods  are  striking  musical  instru- 
ments and  pouring  a  rain  of  Mandaras^  by  which 
they  are  covering  me,  the  disciples  and  other  sages 
who  are  striving  after  enlightenment. 

14.  So  is  my  field  here,  everlastingly;  but  others 
fancy  that  it  is  burning ;  in  their  view  this  world  is 
most  terrific,  wretched,  replete  with  number  of  woes  ^ 

^  6'ayyasana. 

^  The  form  constantly  used  in  Buddhist  writings,  both  in  Pali 
and  Sanskrit,  is  Mandarava.  The  whole  description  of  Heaven, 
or  Paradise,  bears  the  stamp  of  being  taken,  with  more  or  less 
modification,  from  a  non-Buddhistic  source. 

'  There  are  different  beliefs  about  the  realm  of  the  dead ;  the 


XV.  DURATION    OF    LIFE    OF    THE    TATHAGATA.        3O9 

15.  Ay,  many  ko/is  of  years  they  may  pass 
without  ever  having  mentioned  my  name,  the  law, 
or  my  congregation  \  That  is  the  fruit  of  sinful 
deeds. 

16.  But  when  mild  and  gentle  beings  are  born  in 
this  world  of  men,  they  immediately  see  me  reveal- 
ing the  law,  owing  to  their  good  works. 

1 7.  I  never  speak  to  them  of  the  infinitude  of  my 
action.  Therefore,  I  am,  properly,  existing  since 
long  2,  and  yet  declare :  The  6^inas  are  rare  (or 
precious). 

18.  Such  is  the  glorious  power  of  my  wisdom 
that  knows  no  limit,  and  the  duration  of  my  life  is  as 
long  as  an  endless  period ;  I  have  acquired  it  after 
previously  following  a  due  course. 

19.  Feel  no  doubt  concerning  it,  O  sages,  and 
leave  off  all  uncertainty :  the  word  I  here  pronounce 
is  really  true ;  my  word  is  never  false. 

20.  For  even  as  that  physician  skilled  in  devices, 
for  the  sake  of  his  sons  whose  notions  were  per- 
verted, said  that  he  had  died  although  he  was  still 
alive,  and  even  as  no  sensible  man  would  charge 
that  physician  with  falsehood ; 

21.  So  am   I  the  father  of  the  world,  the  Self- 


Brahma-world  and  Paradise  are  usually  depicted  as  places  of  bliss, 
but  Yama's  kingdom  is  often  represented  as  a  kind  of  hell,  though 
at  other  times  the  same  King  of  righteousness  is  said  to  have 
gathered  round  him  the  blessed  company  of  the  pious  departed. 

^  Elsewhere  we  find  Vi,yvanatha,  the  Universal  Lord,  called 
Sahgamejvara,  the  Lord  of  the  gathering.  Yama  is  Vaivasvata 
Sahgamana  ^ananam,  he  of  solar  race,  the  gatherer  of  men, 
Rig-veda  X,  14,  i, 

^  Tenaha  sush//iu  ha  /^irasya  bhomi.  The  phrase  admits  of  being 
translated,  '  therefore,  truly,  I  am  (repeatedly)  born  after  a  long 
time.' 


3IO  SADDHARMA-PUA^DARIKA.  XV. 

born^  the  Healer^,  the  Protector  of  all  creatures. 
Knowing  them  to  be  perverted,  infatuated,  and  igno- 
rant I  teach  final  rest,  myself  not  being  at  rest. 

2  2.  What  reason  should  I  have  to  continually 
manifest  myself?  When  men  become  unbelieving, 
unwise,  ignorant,  careless,  fond  of  sensual  pleasures, 
and  from  thoughtlessness  run  into  misfortune, 

23.  Then  I,  who  know  the  course  of  the  world, 
declare  :  I  am  so  and  so^  (and  consider) :  How 
can  I  incline  them  to  enlightenment  ?  how  can  they 
become  partakers  of  the  Buddha-laws ''  ? 

^  Lokapita  Svayambhu>^.  The  juxtaposition  of  these  two 
words  shows  to  an  evidence  that  6'akyamuni  is  represented  as 
Brahma,  the  uncreated  Being,  existing  from  eternity,  the  Father  of 
the  world,  All-father. 

'^  In  a  moral  sense  the  Saviour,  mythologically  Apollo. 

^  I.e.  I  am  so  in  reality,  tathatathaham.  Burnoufs  rendering, 
'I  am  the  Tathagata,' points  to  a  reading  tathagato  'ham,  which 
comes  to  the  same. 

*  Kathaw  nu  bodhaya  sanamayeya  (Sansk.  sannamayeya)  katha 
buddhadharma«a  bhaveyu  labhina/^. 


XVI.  OF    PIETY.  311 


CHAPTER   XVI. 

OF    PIETY, 

While  this  exposition  of  the  duration  of  the 
Tathagata's  lifetime  was  being  given,  innumerable, 
countless  creatures  profited  by  it.  Then  the  Lord 
addressed  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Maitreya : 
While  this  exposition  of  the  duration  of  the  Tatha- 
gata's lifetime  was  being  given,  A^ita,  sixty-eight 
hundred  thousand  myriads  of  ko^'is  of  Bodhisattvas, 
comparable  to  the  sands  of  the  Ganges  ^  have  acquired 
the  faculty  to  acquiesce  in  the  law  that  has  no  origin. 
A  thousand  'times  more  Bodhisattvas  Mahasattvas 
have  obtained  Dhara^^t^;  and  other  Bodhisattvas 
Mahasattvas,  equal  to  the  dust  atoms  of  one  third  of 
a  macrocosm,  have  by  hearing  this  Dharmaparyaya 
obtained  the  faculty  of  unhampered  view.  Other 
Bodhisattvas  Mahasattvas  again,  equal  to  the  dust 
atoms  of  two-third  parts  of  a  macrocosm,  have  by 
hearing  this  Dharmaparyaya  obtained  the  Dhara;^! 
that  makes  hundred  thousand  ko/is  of  revolutions. 


'  Ash/ashash/ina»i  Gafiga°  Bodhisatvako/inayutajatasahasrawaffi. 
Burnouf  connects  ash/ashash/inam  with  Gahga,  and  translates, 
'  soixante  huit  Ganges.'  His  version  is  justified  by  the  analogy  of 
other  passages. 

2  Dharawi  usually  denotes  a  magic  spell,  a  talisman.  Here 
and  there  it  interchanges  with  dharawa,  support,  the  bearing  in 
mind,  attention.  The  synonymous  raksha  embraces  the  mean- 
ings of  talisman  and  protection,  support.  It  is  not  easy  to  decide 
what  is  intended  in  the  text. 


A 


312  SADDHARMA-PUiVZ>ARIKA.  XVI 


Again,  other  Bodhisattvas  Mahasattvas,  equal  to 
the  dust  atoms  of  a  whole  macrocosm,  have  by 
hearing  this  Dharmaparyaya  moved  forward  the 
wheel  that  never  rolls  back.  Some  Bodhisattvas 
Mahasattvas,  equal  to  the  dust  atoms  of  a  mean  uni- 
verse, have  by  hearing  this  Dharmaparyaya  moved 
forward  the  wheel  of  spotless  radiance.  Other  Bo- 
dhisattvas Mahasattvas,  equal  to  the  dust  atoms  of  a 
small  universe,  have  by  hearing  this  Dharmapar- 
yaya come  so  far  that  they  will  reach  supreme, 
perfect  enlightenment  after  eight  births.  Other 
Bodhisattvas  Mahasattvas,  equal  to  the  dust  atoms 
of  four  worlds  of  four  continents  \  have  by  hearing 
this  Dharmaparyaya  become  such  as  to  require  four 
births  (more)  before  reaching  supreme,  perfect  enlight- 
enment. Other  Bodhisattvas  Mahasattvas,  equal  to 
the  dust  atoms  of  three  four-continental  worlds,  have 
by  hearing  this  Dharmaparyaya  become  such  as  to 
require  three  births  (more)  before  reaching  supreme, 
perfect  enlightenment.  Other  Bodhisattvas  Mahasat- 
tvas, equal  to  the  dust  atoms  of  two  four-continental 
worlds,  have  by  hearing  this  Dharmaparyaya  become 
such  as  to  require  two  births  (more)  before  reaching 
supreme,  perfect  enlightenment.  Other  Bodhisattvas 
Mahasattvas,  equal  to  the  dust  atoms  of  one  four- 
continental  world,  have  by  hearing  this  Dharma- 
paryaya become  such  as  to  require  but  one  birth 
before  reaching  supreme,  perfect  enlightenment. 
Other  Bodhisattvas  Mahasattvas,  equal  to  the  dust 
atoms  of  eight  macrocosms  consisting  of  three  parts, 
have  by  hearing  this  Dharmaparyaya  conceived  the 
idea  of  supreme,  perfect  enlightenment  2. 

'  Or,  perhaps,  of  one  whole  world  of  four  continents. 

^  The  number  8  being  the  half  of  16,  the  number  of  kalas  of  a 


XVI.  OF    PIETY.  313 

No  sooner  had  the  Lord  given  this  exposition 
determining  the  duration  and  periods  of  the  law, 
than  there  fell  from  the  upper  sky  a  great  rain 
of  Mandarava  and  great  Mandarava  flowers  that 
covered  and  overwhelmed  all  the  hundred  thousand 
myriads  of  ko/'is  of  Buddhas  who  were  seated  on 
their  thrones  at  the  foot  of  the  jewel  trees  in  hun- 
dred thousands  of  myriads  of  ko/is  of  worlds.  It 
also  covered  and  overwhelmed  the  Lord  ^akyamuni, 
the  Tathagata,  &c.,  and  the  Lord  Prabhutaratna, 
the  Tathagata,  &c,,  the  latter  sitting  fully  extinct 
on  his  throne,  as  well  as  that  entire  host  of  Bodhi- 
sattvas  and  the  four  classes  of  the  audience.  A 
rain  of  celestial  powder  of  sandal  and  agallochum 
trickled  down  from  the  sky,  whilst  higher  up  in  the 
firmament  the  great  drums  resounded,  without  being 
struck,  with  a  pleasant,  sweet,  and  deep  sound.  Double 
pieces  of  fine  heavenly  cloth  fell  down  by  hundreds 
and  thousands  from  the  upper  sky ;  necklaces,  half- 
necklaces,  pearl  necklaces,  gems,  jewels,  noble  gems, 
and  noble  jewels  were  seen  high  in  the  firmament, 
hanging  down  from  every  side  in  all  directions  of 
space,  while  all  around  thousands  of  jewel  censers, 
containing  priceless,  exquisite  incense,  were  moving 
of  their  own  accord.  Bodhisattvas  Mahasattvas 
were  seen  holding  above  each  Tathagata,  high  aloft, 
a  row  of  jewel  umbrellas  stretching  as  high  as  the 
Brahma-world.  So  acted  the  Bodhisattvas  Maha- 
sattvas in  respect  to  all  the   innumerable  hundred 


whole  circle,  it  may  be  inferred  that  the  description  in  the  text 
alludes  to  the  stars  of  that  half  of  the  sphere  which  is  at  the  time 
below  the  horizon.  Those  stars  then  have  reached  Nirva«a,  though 
not  the  immortal  one. 


314  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  XVI. 

thousands  of  myriads  of  ko/is  of  Buddhas\  Seve- 
rally they  celebrated  these  Buddhas  in  appropriate 
stanzas,  sacred  hymns  in  praise  of  the  Buddhas. 

And  on  that  occasion  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva 
Maitreya  uttered  the  following  stanzas  : 

1.  Wonderful  is  the  law  which  the  Sugfata  has 
expounded,  the  law  we  never  heard  before ;  how 
great  the  majesty  of  the  Leaders  is,  and  how  infinite 
the  duration  of  their  life  ! 

2.  And  on  hearing  such  a  law  imparted  by  the 
Sugata  from  face  to  face,  thousands  of  ko^is  of 
creatures,  the  genuine  sons  of  the  Leader  of  the 
world,  have  been  pervaded  with  gladness. 

3.  Some  have  reached  the  point  of  supreme  en- 
lightenment from  whence  there  is  no  return,  others 
are  standing  on  the  lower  stage  - ;  some  have  reached 
the  standpoint  of  having  an  unhampered  view,  and 
others  have  obtained  thousands  of  ko/is  of  Dhara?^is^ 

4.  There  are  others,  (as)  atoms ^,  who  have  reached 
supreme  Buddha-knowledge.  Some,  again,  will  after 
eight  births  become  6^inas  seeing  the  infinite^. 

5.  Among  those  who  hear  this  law  from  the 
Master,  some  will  obtain  enlightenment  and  see  the 
truth  °  after  four  births,  others  after  three,  others 
after  two. 


^  The  version  followed  by  Burnouf  is  somewhat  longer. 

^  Dharawiye  dharayam,  which  is  ambiguous,  because  the  latter 
may  stand  for  adharayam.  That  dharawi  can  denote  bhdmi  I 
infer  from  the  phrase  (bhumi)  lokadhariwi,  Taitt.  Arawyaka  X,  i. 

*  The  translation  doubtful. 

*  Parama?iu;  the  literal  rendering  is,  others,  extremely  faint  (or 
small). 

^  Cf.  the  phrase  '  to  see  Nirvawa.' 

®  Evidently  the  same  as  '  seeing  Nirva«a,'  as  appears  from  what 
is  added  and  the  analogy  with  the  preceding  stanza. 


XVL  OF    PIETY.  315 

6.  Some  among  them  will  become  all-knowing  ^ 
after  one  birth,  in  the  next  following  existence^. 
Such  will  be  the  perfect  result  of  learning  the 
duration  of  life  of  the  Chief. 

7.  Innumerable,  countless  as  the  atoms  of  the 
eight  fields,  are  the  ko/is  of  beings  who  by  hear- 
ing this  law  have  conceived  the  idea  of  superior 
enlightenment. 

8.  Such  is  the  effect  produced  by  the  great  Seer, 
when  he  reveals  this  Buddha-state  that  is  endless 
and  has  no  limit,  which  is  as  immense  as  the  element 
of  ether. 

9.  Many  thousand  ko/is  of  angels,  Indras,  and 
Brahma-angels,  like  the  sands  of  the  Ganges,  have 
flocked  hither  from  thousands  of  ko/is  of  distant 
fields  and  have  poured  a  rain  of  Mandaravas. 

10.  They  move  in  the  sky  like  birds,  and  strew 
fragrant  powder  of  sandal  and  agallochum,  to  cover 
ceremoniously  the  Chief  of  6^inas  withal. 

1 1.  High  aloft  tymbals  without  being  struck  emit 
sweet  sounds ;  thousands  of  ko/is  of  white  cloth 
whirl  down  upon  the  Chiefs. 

12.  Thousands  of  ko/is  of  jewel  censers  of  costly 
incense  move  of  their  own  accord  on  every  side  to 
honour  the  mighty^  Lord  of  the  world. 

13.  Innumerable  wise  Bodhisattvas  hold  myriads 
of  ko/'is  of  umbrellas,  elevated  and  made  of  noble 
jewels,  like  chaplets^  up  to  the  Brahma-world. 

14.  The  sons  of  Sugata,  in  their  great  joy,  have 

^  Another  term  for  seeing  Nirvawa. 

^  These  four  descriptions  of  Bodhisattvas  agree  in  the  main 
with  the  four  degrees  of  hoHness,  of  Srotaapanna,  Sakn'dagamin, 
Anagamin,  and  Arhat. 

3  T  ay  in.  *  Utansakan  (sic). 


3l6  SADDHARMA-PUiVZJARlKA.  XVI. 

attached  beautiful  triumphal  streamers  at  the  top 
of  the  banner  staffs^  in  honour  of  the  Leaders  whom 
they  celebrate  in  thousands  of  stanzas. 

15.  Such  a  marvellous,  extraordinary,  prodigious, 
splendid^  phenomenon,  O  Leader,  is  being  displayed 
by  all  those  beings  who  are  gladdened  by  the  expo- 
sition of  the  duration  of  life  (of  the  Tathagata). 

16.  Grand  is  the  matter  now  (occurring)  in  the 
ten  points  of  space,  and  (great)  the  sound  raised  by 
the  Leaders  ;  thousands  of  ko^'is  of  living  beings  are 
refreshed  and  gifted  with  virtue  for  enlightenment. 

Thereupon  the  Lord  addressed  the  Bodhisattva 
Mahasattva  Maitreya :  Those  beings,  A^ita,  who 
during  the  exposition  of  this  Dharmaparyaya  in 
which  the  duration  of  the  Tathaeata's  life  is  revealed 
have  entertained,  were  it  but  a  single  thought  of  trust, 
or  have  put  belief  in  it,  how  great  a  merit  are  they 
to  produce,  be  they  young  men  and  young  ladies  of 
good  family  ?  Listen  then,  and  mind  it  well,  how 
great  the  merit  is  they  shall  produce.  Let  us  sup- 
pose the  case,  A^ita,  that  some  young  man  or  young 
lady  of  good  family,  desirous  of  supreme,  perfect 
enlightenment,  for  eight  hundred  thousand  myriads 
of  ko/is  of  yEons  practises  the  five  perfections  of 
virtue  (Paramitas),  to  wit,  perfect  charity  in  alms, 
perfect  morality,  perfect  forbearance,  perfect  energy, 
perfect  meditation — perfect  wisdom  being  excepted^; 

^  Dhva^agre;  a  marginal  reading  has  dhva^a;;/  X-a  (sic). 

^  'Eta.dn'sa.si'a.rya.  vijish/am  adbhuta^  (r.  adbhuta;//),  vi/^itra  dar- 
sent'  ima(m)  adya  Nayaka. 

^  Virahita^  pra^fiaparamitaya(^).  The  five  specified  virtues  are 
identical  with  those  enumerated  in  Lalita-vistara,  p.  38,  and  slightly 
different  from  those  as  found  in  the  Pali  scriptures.  Out  of  the 
five  virtues,  four,  viz.  jila,  kshanti,  virya,  dhyana,  answer  to 


XVI.  OF    PIETY.  317 

let  US,  on  the  other  hand,  suppose  the  case,  A^^ita, 
that  a  young  man  or  young  lady  of  good  family,  on 
hearing  this  Dharmaparyaya  containing  the  exposi- 
tion of  the  duration  of  the  Tathagata's  life,  conceives 
were  it  but  a  single  thought  of  trust  or  puts  belief 
in  it ;  then  that  former  accumulation  of  merit^,  that 
accumulation  of  good  connected  with  the  five  perfec- 
tions of  virtue,  (that  accumulation)  which  has  come 
to  full  accomplishment  in  eight  hundred  thousand 
myriads  of  koz^is  of  ^ons,  does  not  equal  one  hun- 
dredth part  of  the  accumulation  of  merit  in  the  second 
case ;  it  does  not  equal  one  thousandth  part ;  it  admits 
of  no  calculation,  no  counting,  no  reckoning,  no  com- 
parison, no  approximation,  no  secret  teaching  2.  One 
who  is  possessed  of  such  an  accumulation  of  merit, 
A^ta,  be  he  a  young  man  or  a  young  lady  of  good 
family,  will  not  miss  supreme,  perfect  enlightenment ; 
no,  that  is  not  possible. 


dama,  kshama,  dhr^'ti,  dhi  in  Manu  VI,  92,  where  vidya  is  the 
equivalent  to  the  Paramita  of  p raffia. 

^  Fufiyabhisamskara,  which  may  be  said  to  be  the  common 
Buddhistic  equivalent  of  karma^aya,  explained  by  Hindu  scho- 
lastics to  be  the  accumulation  of  moral  merit  and  demerit.  The 
term  properly  means '  one's  moral  disposition  (at  a  given  time  as  a 
necessary  result  of  one's  previous  acts).'  In  a  certain  sense  it  may 
be  contended  that  the  sum  of  one's  previous  actions  determines 
one's  moral  state  at  a  given  moment.  As  ajaya  means  disposition, 
character,  and  accumulation,  we  can  understand  how  the  Indian 
scholastics  came  to  misunderstand  the  real  purport  of  the  word  in 
karmajaya.  As  to  abhisawzskara,  it  properly  means  '(mental 
or  moral)  disposition,  character,  impression,  conception.' 

"^  Upanisam  api,  upanishadam  api  na  kshamate.  Upanisa  is 
nothing  else  but  the  Prakrit  form  of  Sansk.  upanishad.  In  Pali  it 
is  explained  by  raho,  mystery,  secret  lore,  and  karawa;  the  latter 
may  mean  'mathematical  operation.'  See,  however,  the  Editor's 
note  on  Sukhavati-vyQha,  p.  31. 


3 1 8  SADDHARMA-PUiVZ)ARiKA.  XYI. 


O 


And  on  that  occasion  the  Lord  uttered  the  follow- 
ing stanzas : 

1 7.  Let  a  man  who  is  seeking  after  this  knowledge, 
superior  Buddha-knowledge,  undertake  to  practise  in 
this  world  the  five  perfect  virtues ; 

18.  Let  him,  during  eight  thousand  ko/is  of 
complete  ^ons,  continue  giving  repeated  alms  to 
Buddhas  and  disciples ; 

1 9.  Regaling  Pratyekabuddhas  and  kofis  of  Bodhi- 
sattvas  by  giving  meat,  food  and  drink,  clothing  and 
lodging  1 ; 

20.  Let  him  build  on  earth  refuges  and  monasteries 
of  sandal-wood,  and  pleasant  convent  gardens  pro- 
vided with  walks  ; 

21.  Let  him  after  so  bestowing  gifts,  various  and 
diversified,  during  thousands  of  ko/is  of  y^ons,  direct 
his  mind  to  enlightenment^; 

22.  Let  him  then,  for  the  sake  of  Buddha- 
knowledge,  keep  unbroken  the  pure  moral  precepts 
which  have  been  recommended  by  the  perfect  Bud- 
dhas and  acknowledged  by  the  wise  ; 

23.  Let  him  further  develop  the  virtue  of  for- 
bearance, be  steady  in  the  stage  of  meekness^,  be 
constant,  of  good  memory,  and  patiently  endure 
many  censures ; 

24.  Let  him,  moreover,  for  the  sake  of  Buddha- 


^  These  Pratyekabuddhas  can  hardly  be  other  persons  than 
hermits,  and  the  Bodhisattvas  must  be  the  ministers  of  religion, 
who  otherwise  are  called  Pa/z^tas,  and  Vandyas,  whence  our 
Bonzes. 

^  I.  e.,  if  I  rightly  understand  it,  let  him,  after  having  lived  in  the 
world,  retire  from  a  busy  life  to  take  orders. 

^  I.  e.  of  a  monk  under  training. 


XYL  OF    PIETY.  319 

knowledge,  bear   the    contemptuous   words    of  un- 
believers who  are  rooted  in  pride ; 

25.  Let  him,  always  zealous,  strenuous,  studious, 
of  good  memory,  without  any  other  pre-occupation  in 
his  mind,  practise  meditation,  during  ko/is  of  yEons  ; 

26.  Let  him,  whether  living  in  the  forest  or  enter- 
ing upon  a  vagrant  life\  go  about,  avoiding  sloth 
and  torpor^,  for  ko/is  of  yEons  ; 

27.  Let  him  as  a  philosopher,  a  great  philosopher^ 
who  finds  his  delight  in  meditation,  in  concentration 
of  mind,  pass  eight  thousand  ko/is  of  ^ons  ; 

28.  Let  him  energetically  pursue  enlightenment 
with  the  thought  of  his  reaching  all-knowingfiess,  and 
so  arrive  at  the  highest  degree  of  meditation ; 

29.  Then  the  merit  accruing  to  those  who  practise 
the  virtues  oft  described,  during  thousands  of  ko/is 
of  -^ons, 

30.  (Is  less  than  that  of)  a  man  or  a  woman  who, 
on  hearing  the  duration  of  my  life,  for  a  single  mo- 
ment believes  in  it ;  this  merit  is  endless. 

31.  He  who  renouncing  doubt,  vacillation,  and 
misgiving  shall  believe  even  for  a  short  moment, 
shall  obtain  such  a  reward. 

32.  The  Bodhisattvas  also,who  have  practised  those 
virtues  during  ko/is  of  ^ons,  will  not  be  startled  at 
hearing  of  this  inconceivably  long  life  of  mine. 

33.  They  will  bow  their  heads  (and  think) :  *  May 
I  also  in  future  become  such  a  one  and  release  ko/is 
of  living  beings ! 

^  A'ankramam  abhiruhya. 

^  Styanamiddhail/^a  var^itva.  Middha,  well  known  from 
Buddhistic  writings,  is  a  would-be  Sanskrit  form  ;  it  ought  to  be 
mr/ddha,  from  Vedic  mrz'dhyati. 

'  I.  e.  a  Yogin,  a  contemplative  mystic. 


320  SADDHARMA-PU-ZVDARIKA.  XVI. 


34.  'As  the  Lord  6'akyamuni,  the  Lion  of  the  ^Sakya 
race,  after  he  had  occupied  his  seat  on  the  terrace  of 
enhghtenment,  raised  his  Hon's  roar ; 

35.  'So  may  I  in  future  be  sitting  on  the  terrace 
of  enlightenment,  honoured  by  all  mortals,  to  teach 
so  long  a  life  ^ ! ' 

2)6.  Those  who  are  possessed  of  firmness  of  inten- 
tion ^  and  have  learnt  the  principles,  will  understand 
the  mystery^  and  feel  no  uncertainty ^ 

Again,  A^ita,  he  who  after  hearing  this  Dharma- 
paryaya,  which  contains  an  exposition  of  the  duration 
of  the  Tathagata's  life,  apprehends  it,  penetrates  and 
understands  it,  will  produce  a  yet  more  immeasur- 
able accumulation  of  merit  conducive  to  Buddha- 
knowledge  ;  unnecessary  to  add  that  he  who  hears 
such  a  Dharmaparyaya  as  this  or  makes  others  hear 
it ;  who  keeps  it  in  memory,  reads,  comprehends  or 
makes  others  comprehend  it ;  who  writes  or  has  it 
written,  collects  or  has  it  collected  into  a  volume, 
honours,  respects,  worships  it  with  flowers,  incense, 
perfumed  garlands,  ointments,  powder,  cloth,  um- 
brellas, flags,  streamers,  (lighted)  oil  lamps,  ghee 
lamps  or  lamps  filled  with  scented  oil,  will  produce 
a  far  greater  accumulation  of  merit  conducive  to 
Buddha-knowledge. 

And,  A^Ita,  as  a  test  whether  that  young  man  or 
young  lady  of  good  family  who  hears  this  exposition 

^  It  is  difficult  to  say  what  difference  there  is  between  becoming 
Buddha  or  becoming  Brahma,  except  in  sound. 

^  Or  strong  application,  the  word  used  in  the  text  being  adhyo- 
saya  (Sansk.  adhyavasaya). 

*  Sandhabhashya. 

*  The  tenor  of  this  stanza,  and  even  the  words,  remind  one  of 
the  ^'a^/fiTilyavidya  in  iS'y^andogya-upanishad  III,  14,  4. 


XYI.  OF    PIETY.  321 

of  the  duration  of  the  Tathagata's  Hfe  most  decidedly 
beHeves  in  it  may  be  deemed  the  following.  They 
will  behold  me  teaching  the  law  ^  here  on  the 
Grz'dhraku/a^,  surrounded  by  a  host  of  Bodhisattvas, 
attended  by  a  host  of  Bodhisattvas,  in  the  centre 
of  the  congregation  of  disciples.  They  will  behold 
here  my  Buddha-field  in  the  Saha-world,  consisting 
of  lapis  lazuli  and  forming  a  level  plain  ;  forming  a 
chequered  board  of  eight  compartments  with  gold 
threads  ;  set  off  with  jewel  trees.  They  will  behold 
the  towers  that  the  Bodhisattvas  use  as  their  abodes  ^ 
By  this  test,  A^ita,  one  may  know  if  a  young  man 
or  young  lady  of  good  family  has  a  most  decided 
belief.  Moreover,  A^ita,  I  declare  that  a  young 
man  of  good  family  who,  after  the  complete  extinc- 
tion of  the  Tathagata,  shall  not  reject,  but  joyfully 
accept  this  Dharmaparyaya  when  hearing  it,  that 
such  a  young  man  of  good  family  also  is  earnest  in 
his  belief;  far  more  one  who  keeps  it  in  memory 
or  reads  it.  He  who  after  collecting  this  Dharma- 
paryaya into  a  volume  carries  it  on  his  shoulder* 
carries  the  Tathagata  on  his  shoulder.  Such  a  young 
man  or  young  lady  of  good  family,  A^ita,  need  make 
no  Stupas  for  me,  nor  monasteries ;  need  not  give 
to  the  congregation  of  monks  medicaments  for  the 

^  And,  pronouncing  judgment. 

^  We  have  seen  above  that  this  is  the  true  abode  of  the 
Dharmar%a. 

^  Ku/agaraparibhogeshu  Bodhisatvavasa»z  va  drakshyanti,  pro- 
perly, they  will  behold  the  dwelling  of  the  Bodhisattvas  in  the 
towers  which  those  Bodhisattvas  have  received  for  their  use. 
About  the  technical  meaning  of  kij/agara  in  Nepal,  see  B. 
H.  Hodgson,  Essays,  p.  49. 

*  I.  e.  holds  it  in  high  esteem  and  treats  it  with  care. 

[21]  Y 


322  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  XVI. 

sick  or  (other)  requisites  ^    For,  A_c^ita,  such  a  young 
man  or  young  lady  of  good  family  has  (spiritually) 
built  for  the  worship  of  my  relics  Sttapas  of  seven 
precious  substances  reaching  up  to  the  Brahma-world 
in  height,  and  with  a  circumference   in  proportion, 
with  the  umbrellas  thereto  belonging,  with  triumphal 
streamers,    with    tinkling    bells    and    baskets ;    has 
shown  manifold   marks  of  respect  to  those  StiJpas 
of  relics  with  diverse  celestial  and  earthly  flowers, 
incense,  perfumed  garlands,  ointments,  powder,  cloth, 
umbrellas,   banners,  flags,   triumphal   streamers,  by 
various  sweet,  pleasant,  clear-sounding  tymbals  and 
drums,  by  the  tune,  noise,  sounds  of  musical  instru- 
ments and  castanets,  by  songs,  nautch  and  dancing 
of  different  kinds,  of  many,  innumerable  kinds ;  has 
done  those  acts  of  worship  during  many,  innumer- 
able thousands  of  ko^'is  of  ^ons.     One  who  keeps 
in  memory  this  Dharmaparyaya  after  my  complete 
extinction,  who  reads,  writes,  promulgates  it,  A^ita, 
shall  also    have  built   monasteries,  large,  spacious, 
extensive,  made  of  red  sandal-wood,  with  thirty-two 
pinnacles,  eight  stories,  fit  for  a   thousand   monks, 
adorned   with    gardens    and    flowers,   having  walks 
furnished  with   lodgings,  completely  provided  with 
meat,    food   and    drink    and   medicaments    for    the 
sick,  well  equipped  with   all  comforts.     And  those 
numerous,   innumerable   beings,   say  a  hundred   or 
a  thousand  or  ten  thousand  or  a  ko/i   or  hundred 
ko/is  or  thousand  ko/is  or  hundred  thousand  ko/is 
or  ten  thousand  times  hundred  thousand  ko/is,  they 


^  This  agrees  with  the  teaching  of  the  Vedanta  that  Brahma- 
knowledge  is  independent  of  good  works ;  see  e.  g.  Brahma-butra 
III,  4,  25. 


XVI.  OF    PIETY.  '2  2; 

must  be  considered  to  form  the  congregation  of 
disciples  seeing  me  from  face  to  face,  and  must  be 
considered  as  those  whom  I  have  fully  blessed  ^ 
He  who,  after  my  complete  extinction,  shall  keep 
this  Dharmaparyaya,  read,  promulgate,  or  write  it, 
he,  I  repeat,  A^ita,  need  not  build  Stijpas  of  relics, 
nor  worship  the  congregation  ;  not  necessary  to  tell, 
A^ita,  that  the  young  man  or  young  lady  of  good 
family  who,  keeping  this  Dharmaparyaya,  shall  crown 
it  by  charity  in  alms,  morality,  forbearance,  energy, 
meditation,  or  wisdom,  will  produce  a  much  greater 
accumulation  of  merit ;  it  is,  in  fact,  immense,  incal- 
culable, infinite^.  Just  as  the  element  of  ether, 
A^ita,  is  boundless,  to  the  east,  south,  west,  north, 
beneath,  above,  and  in  the  intermediate  quarters,  so 
immense  and  incalculable  an  accumulation  of  merit, 
conducive  to  Buddha-knowledge,  will  be  produced 
by  a  young  man  or  young  lady  of  good  family  who 
shall  keep,  read,  write,  or  cause  to  be  written,  this 
Dharmaparyaya.  He  will  be  zealous  in  worship- 
ping the  Tathagata  shrines;  he  will  laud  the  disciples 
of  the  Tathagata,  praise  the  hundred  thousands  of 
myriads  of  ko/is  of  virtues  of  the  Bodhisattvas 
Mahasattvas,  and  expound  them  to  others ;  he  will 
be  accomplished  in  forbearance,  be  moral,  of  good 
character  2,  agreeable  to  live  with,  and  tolerant, 
modest,  not  jealous  of  others,  not  wrathful,  not 
vicious  in  mind,  of  good  memory,  strenuous  and 
always  busy,  devoted  to  meditation  in  striving  after 
the   state  of  a    Buddha,   attaching   great   value   to 

^  Paribhukta. 

^  The  Vedantin  does  not  deny  the  relative  value  of  good  works  ; 
see  e.  g.  Brahma-sutra  III,  4,  26-27. 
^  Kalyawadharman. 

Y   2 


324  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARlKA.  XVI 


abstract  meditation,  frequently  engaging  in  abstract 
meditation,  able  in  solving  questions  and  in  avoid- 
ing hundred  thousands  of  myriads  of  ko/is  of  ques- 
tions. Any  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva,  A^ita,  who, 
after  the  Tathagata's  complete  extinction,  shall  keep 
this  Dharmaparyaya,  will  have  the  good  qualities  I 
have  described.  Such  a  young  man  or  young  lady 
of  good  family,  A^ita,  must  be  considered  to  make 
for  the  terrace  of  enlightenment ;  that  young  man  or 
young  lady  of  good  family  steps  towards  the  foot  of 
the  tree  of  enlightenment  in  order  to  reach  enlighten- 
ment. And  where  that  young  man  or  young  lady  of 
good  family,  A^ita,  stands,  sits,  or  walks,  there  one 
should  make  a  shrine  ^,  dedicated  to  the  Tathagata, 
and  the  world,  including  the  gods,  should  say :  This 
is  a  Stiipa  of  relics  of  the  Tathagata. 

And  on  that  occasion  the  Lord  uttered  the  folio w- 


mof  stanzas ; 


37.  An  immense  mass  of  merit,  as  I  have  re- 
peatedly mentioned,  shall  be  his  who,  after  the  com- 
plete extinction  of  the  Leader  of  men,  shall  keep  this 
Sutra. 

38.  He  will  have  paid  worship  to  me,  and  built 
Stupas  of  relics,  made  of  precious  substances,  varie- 
gated, beautiful,  and  splendid ; 

39.  In  height  coming  up  to  the  Brahma-world, 
with  rows  of  umbrellas,  great  in  circumference^, 
gorgeous,  and  decorated  with  triumphal  streamers  ; 

40.  Resounding  with  the  clear  ring  of  bells,  and 
decorated  with  silk  bands,  while  jingles  moved  by 

^  One  would  rather  expect,  that  place  one  should  consider  to  be 
a  shrine. 

^  Pariwahavanta/?.  There  is  no  word  for  Burnoufs  '  pro- 
portionn^'  (anupilrva)  in  the  text. 


XVI.  OF    PIETY.  325 

the  wind  form  another  ornament  at  (the  shrines  of) 
6^ina  relics  V 

41.  He  will  have  shown  great  honour  to  them 
by  flowers,  perfumes,  and  ointments ;  by  music, 
clothes,  and  the  repeated  (sound  of)  tymbals. 

42.  He  will  have  sweet  musical  instruments  struck 
at  those  relics,  and  lamps  with  scented  oil  kept  burn- 
ing all  around. 

43.  He  who  at  the  period  of  depravation  shall 
keep  and  teach  this  Sutra,  he  will  have  paid  me 
such  an  infinitely  varied  worship. 

44.  He  has  built  many  ko/is  of  excellent  monas- 
teries of  sandal-wood,  with  thirty-two  pinnacles,  and 
eight  terraces  high  ; 

45.  Provided  with  couches,  with  food  hard  and 
soft ;  furnished  with  excellent  curtains,  and  having 
cells  by  thousands. 

46.  He  has  given  hermitages  and  walks  em- 
bellished by  flower-gardens  ;  many  elegant  objects^ 
of  various  forms  and  variegated. 

47.  He  has  shown  manifold  worship  to  the  host 
of  disciples  in  my  presence,  he  who,  after  my  extinc- 
tion, shall  keep  this  Sutra. 

48.  Let  one  be  ever  so  good  in  disposition,  much 
greater  merit  will  he  obtain  who  shall  keep  or  write 
this  Sutra. 

49.  Let   a    man    cause    this    to    be    written    and 

^  -Sobhante  Ginadhatushu.  Burnouf  gives  a  different  trans- 
lation of  this  passage  :  '  ces  Stupas,  enfin,  refoivent  leur  ^clat  des 
reliques  du  Djina.' 

^  I  am  quite  uncertain  about  the  word  in  the  text,  U/^/^/zadaka. 
It  seems  to  be  connected  with  the  Pali  ussada,  about  which 
Childers,  s.  v.,  remarks  that  it  probably  means  '  a  protuberance,' 
Burnouf  renders  the  word  in  our  text  by  '  coussin.' 


32  5  SADDHARMA-PUiVZ)ARIKA.  SYI. 

have  it  well  put  together  in  a  volume ;  let  him 
always  worship  the  volume  with  flowers,  garlands, 
ointments. 

50.  Let  him  constantly  place  near  it  a  lamp  filled 
with  scented  oil,  along  with  full-blown  lotuses  and 
suitable^  oblations  of  Michelia  Champaka. 

51.  The  man  who  pays  such  worship  to  the  books 
will  produce  a  mass  of  merit  which  is  not  to  be 
measured, 

52.  Even  as  there  is  no  measure  of  the  element 
of  ether,  in  none  of  the  ten  directions,  so  there  is  no 
measure  of  this  mass  of  merit. 

53.  How  much  more  will  this  be  the  case  with 
one  who  is  patient,  meek,  devoted,  moral,  studious, 
and  addicted  to  meditation  ; 

54.  Who  is  not  irascible,  not  treacherous,  reve- 
rential towards  the  sanctuary,  always  humble  towards 
monks,  not  conceited,  nor  neglectful ; 

55.  Sensible  and  wise,  not  angry  when  he  is  asked 
a  question  ;  who,  full  of  compassion  for  living  beings, 
gives  such  instruction  as  suits  them. 

56.  If  there  be  such  a  man  who  (at  the  same  time) 
keeps  this  Sutra,  he  will  possess  a  mass  of  merit  that 
cannot  be  measured. 

57.  If  one  meets  such  a  man  as  here  described,  a 
keeper  of  this  Sutra,  one  should  do  homage  to  him. 

58.  One  should  present  him  with  divine  flowers, 
cover  him  with  divine  clothes,  and  bow  the  head 
to  salute  his  feet,  in  the  conviction  of  his  being  a 
Tathaofata. 

59.  And  at  the  sight  of  such   a   man  one   may 

^  Yuktai/^.  Burnouf  must  have  read  muktaij^,  for  his  trans- 
lation has  *  pearls.' 


XVI.  OF    PIETY.  327 

directly  make  the  reflection  that  he  is  going  towards 
the  foot  of  the  tree  to  arrive  at  superior,  blessed 
enlightenment  for  the  weal  of  all  the  world,  including 
the  gfods. 

60.  And  wherever  such  a  sao^e  is  walkings,  stand- 
ing,  sitting,  or  lying  down ;  wherever  the  hero  pro- 
nounces were  it  but  a  single  stanza  from  this  Sutra  ; 

61.  There  one  should  build  a  Stiipa  for  the  most 
high  of  men,  a  splendid,  beautiful  (Stupa),  dedicated 
to  the  Lord  Buddha,  the  Chief,  and  then  worship  it 
in  manifold  ways. 

62.  That  spot  of  the  earth  has  been  enjoyed  by 
myself;  there  have  I  walked  myself,  and  there  have 
I  been  sitting  ;  where  that  son  of  Buddha  has  stayed, 
there  I  am. 


328  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  XYII 


CHAPTER  XVII. 

INDICATION    OF    THE    MERITORIOUSNESS    OF    JOYFUL 

ACCEPTANCE. 

Thereupon  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Maitreya 
said  to  the  Lord  :  O  Lord,  one  who,  after  hearing  this 
Dharmaparyaya  being  preached,  joyfully^  accepts  it, 
be  that  person  a  young  man  of  good  family  or  a 
young  lady,  how  much  merit,  O  Lord,  will  be  pro- 
duced by  such  a  young  man  or  young  lady  of  good 
family  ? 

And  on  that  occasion  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva 
Maitreya  uttered  this  stanza  : 

I.  How  great  will  be  the  merit  of  him  who,  after 
the  extinction  of  the  great  Hero,  shall  hear  this 
exalted  Sutra  and  joyfully  accept  it  ? 

And  the  Lord  said  to  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva 
Maitreya  :  If  any  one,  A^ita,  either  a  young  man  of 
good  family  or  a  young  lady,  after  the  complete 
extinction  of  the  Tathagata,  hears  the  preaching  of 
this  Dharmaparyaya,  let  it  be  a  monk  or  nun,  a  male 
or  female  lay  devotee,  a  man  of  ripe  understanding 
or  a  boy  or  girl ;  if  the  hearer  joyfully  accepts  it,  and 
then  after  the  sermon  rises  up  to  go  elsewhere,  to  a 
monastery,  house,  forest,  street,  village,  town,  or  pro- 
vince, with  the  motive  and  express  aim  to  expound 
the  law  such  as  he  has  understood,  such  as  he  has 
heard  it,  and  according  to  the  measure  of  his  power, 

^  Or,  gratefully. 


XVII.      MERITORIOUSNESS  OF  JOYFUL  ACCEPTANCE.       329 

to  another  person,  his  mother,  father,  kinsman,  friend, 
acquaintance,  or  any  other  person  ;  if  the  latter,  after 
hearing,  joyfully  accepts,  and,  in  consequence,  com- 
municates it  to  another ;  if  the  latter,  after  hearing, 
joyfully  accepts,  and  communicates  it  to  another ;  if 
this  other,  again,  after  hearing,  joyfully  accepts  it, 
and  so  on  in  succession  until  a  number  of  fifty  is 
reached ;  then,  A^ita,  the  fiftieth  person  to  hear  and 
joyfully  accept  the  law  so  heard,  let  it  be  a  young 
man  of  good  family  or  a  young  lady,  will  have 
acquired  an  accumulation  of  merit  connected  with 
the  joyful  acceptance,  A^ita,  which  I  am  going  to 
indicate  to  thee.  Listen,  and  take  it  well  to  heart ; 
I  will  tell  thee. 

It  is,  A^ita,  as  if  the  creatures  existing  in  the 
four  hundred  thousand  Asaiikhyeyas^  of  worlds,  in 
any  of  the  six  states  of  existence,  born  from  an  egg, 
from  a  womb,  from  warm  humidity,  or  from  meta- 
morphosis, whether  they  have  a  shape  or  have  not, 
be  they  conscious  or  unconscious,  neither  conscious 
nor  unconscious,  footless,  two-footed,  four-footed,  or 
many-footed,  as  many  beings  as  are  contained  in  the 
world  of  creatures, — (as  if)  all  those  had  flocked  to- 
gether to  one  place.  Further,  suppose  some  man 
appears,  a  lover  of  virtue,  a  lover  of  good,  who  gives 
to  that  whole  body  the  pleasures,  sports,  amuse- 
ments, and  enjoyments  they  desire,  like,  and  relish. 
He  gives  to  each  of  them  all  G'ambudvipa  for  his 
pleasures,  sports,  amusements,  and  enjoyments  ; 
gives  bullion,  gold,  silver,  gems,  pearls,  lapis  lazuli, 
conches,  stones  (?),  coral,  carriages  yoked  with  horses, 
with   bullocks,   with    elephants ;   gives    palaces    and 


^  An  incakulable  great  number. 


330  SADDIIARMA-PU^•Z)ARIKA.  XYTT. 

towers.  In  this  way,  A^'ita,  that  master  of  munifi- 
cence, that  orreat  master  of  munificence  continues 
spending  his  gifts  for  fully  eighty  years.  Then,  A^ita, 
that  master  of  munificence,  that  great  master  of 
munificence  reflects  thus :  All  these  beings  have  1 
allowed  to  sport  and  enjoy  themselves,  but  now 
they  are  covered  with  wrinkles  and  grey-haired,  old, 
decrepit,  eighty  years  of  age,  and  near  the  term  of 
their  life.  Let  me  therefore  initiate  them  in  the 
discipline  of  the  law  revealed  by  the  Tathagata,  and 
instruct  them.  Thereupon,  A^ita,  the  man  exhorts 
all  those  beings,  thereafter  initiates  them  in  the 
discipline  of  the  law  revealed  by  the  Tathagata,  and 
makes  them  adopt  it.  Those  beings  learn  the  law 
from  him,  and  in  one  moment,  one  instant,  one  bit 
of  time,  all  become  Srotaapannas,  obtain  the  fruit 
of  the  rank  of  Sakr/dagamin  and  of  Anagamin,  until 
they  become  Arhats,  free  from  all  imperfections, 
adepts  in  meditation,  adepts  in  great  meditation  and 
in  the  meditation  with  eight  emancipations.  Now, 
what  is  thine  opinion,  A^ita,  will  that  master  of 
munificence,  that  great  master  of  munificence,  on 
account  of  his  doings,  produce  great  merit,  immense, 
incalculable  merit  ?  Whereupon  the  Bodhisattva 
Mahasattva  Maitreya  said  in  reply  to  the  Lord  :  Cer- 
tainly, Lord ;  certainly,  Sugata  ;  that  person.  Lord, 
will  already  produce  much  merit  on  that  account, 
because  he  gives  to  the  beings  all  that  is  necessary 
for  happiness  ;  how  much  more  then  if  he  establishes 
them  in  Arhatship ! 

This  said,  the  Lord  spoke  to  the  Bodhisattva 
Mahasattva  Maitreya  as  follows  :  I  announce  to  thee, 
A^ita,  I  declare  to  thee  ;  (take)  on  one  side  the  mas- 
ter of  munificence,  the  great  master  of  munificence, 


XVIT.      MERITORIOUSNESS  OF  JOYFUL  ACCEPTANCE.       33  I 

who  produces  merit  by  supplying  all  beings  in  the 
four  hundred  thousand  Asarikhyeyas  of  worlds  with 
all  the  necessaries  for  happiness  and  by  establishing 
them  in  Arhatship ;  (take)  on  the  other  side  the 
person  who,  ranking  the  fiftieth  in  the  series  of  the 
oral  tradition  of  the  law,  hears,  were  it  but  a  single 
stanza,  a  single  word,  from  this  Dharmaparyaya  and 
joyfully  accepts  it ;  if  (we  compare)  the  mass  of  merit 
connected  with  the  joyful  acceptance  and  the  mass  of 
merit  connected  with  the  charity  of  the  master  of 
munificence,  the  great  master  of  munificence,  then 
the  greater  merit  will  be  his  who,  ranking  the 
fiftieth  in  the  series  of  the  oral  tradition  of  the 
law,  after  hearing  were  it  but  a  single  stanza,  a 
single  word,  from  this  Dharmaparyaya,  joyfully 
accepts  it.  Against  this  accumulation  of  merit, 
A^ita,  this  accumulation  of  roots  of  goodness  con- 
nected with  that  joyful  acceptance,  the  former  accu- 
mulation of  merit  connected  with  the  charity  of 
that  master  of  munificence,  that  great  master  of 
munificence,  and  connected  with  the  confirmation 
in    Arhatship,    does    not    fetch    the    ^    part,    not 

tfiG    iuu,ouo»  ric)t    the    10,000,000?  riot  the  1000,000,0005  ^^ot   the 

1000xl0,000,000»  ^Ot  the  100,000x10,000,000)  ^Ot  the  100, 000 X  10,000 X  10,000,000 

part ;  it  admits  of  no  calculation,  no  counting,  no 
reckoning,  no  comparison,  no  approximation,  no 
secret  teaching.  So  immense,  incalculable,  A^ita,  is 
the  merit  which  a  person,  ranking  the  fiftieth  in 
the  series  of  the  tradition  of  the  law,  produces  by 
joyfully  accepting,  were  it  but  a  single  stanza,  a 
single  word,  from  this  Dharmaparyaya  ;  how  much 
more  then  (will)  he  (produce),  A^ita,  who  hears 
this  Dharmaparyaya  in  -  my  presence  and  then 
joyfully    accepts    it  ?      I    declare,    A^ita,    that    his 


332  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  XVII. 


accumulation  of  merit  shall  be  even  more  immense, 
more  incalculable. 

And  further,  A^ita,  if  a  young  man  of  good  family 
or  a  young  lady,  with  the  design  to  hear  this  dis- 
course on  the  law,  goes  from  home  to  a  monastery, 
and   there  hears   this  Dharmaparyaya   for  a  single 
moment,  either  standing  or  sitting,  then  that  person, 
merely  by   the   mass   of  merit   resulting  from  that 
action,  will  after    the   termination    of  his  (present) 
life,  and  at  the  time  of  his  second  existence  when 
he    receives    (another)    body,    become    a   possessor 
of  carriages    yoked  with    bullocks,   horses,   or   ele- 
phants, of  litters,  vehicles  yoked  with  bulls  \  and  of 
celestial  aerial   cars.      If  further  that  same   person 
at   that   preaching  sits  down,  were  it  but  a  single 
moment,  to  hear  this  Dharmaparyaya,  or  persuades 
another  to  sit  down  or  shares  with  him  his  seat,  he 
will  by  the  store  of  merit  resulting  from  that  action 
gain  seats  of  Indra,  seats  of  Brahma,  thrones  of  a 
A'akravartin.    And,  A^ita,  if  some  one,  a  young  man 
of  good  family  or  a   young  lady,  says  to   another 
person  :  Come,  friend,  and  hear  the  Dharmaparyaya 
of  the   Lotus  of  the  True  Law,  and  if  that  other 
person   owing  to   that  exhortation  is   persuaded  to 
listen,  were  it  but  a  single  moment,  then  the  former 
will  by  virtue  of  that  root  of  goodness,  consisting  in 
that  exhortation,  obtain   the    advantage    of  a  con- 
nection with  Bodhisattvas  who  have  acquired  Dha- 
ra;^i.      He  will  become  the  reverse  of  dull,  will  get 
keen  faculties,  and  have  wisdom  ;   in  the  course  of 
a  hundred  thousand  existences  he  will  never  have  a 
fetid  mouth,  nor  an  offensive  one ;  he  will  have  no 


^  i?/shabhayana/;am. 


XVIT.      MERITORIOUSNESS  OF  JOYFUL  ACCEPTANCE.       2)33 


diseases  of  the  tongue,  nor  of  the  mouth  ;  he  will 
have  no  black  teeth,  no  unequal,  no  yellow,  no  ill- 
ranged,  no  broken  teeth,  no  teeth  fallen  out;  his 
lips  will  not  be  pendulous,  not  turned  inward,  not 
gaping,  not  mutilated,  not  loathsome  ^  ;  his  nose  will 
not  be  flat,  nor  wry ;  his  face  will  not  be  long,  nor 
wry,  nor  unpleasant.  On  the  contrary,  A^ita,  his 
tongue,  teeth,  and  lips  will  be  delicate  and  well- 
shaped;  his  nose  long;  his  face  perfectly  round 2;  the 
eyebrows  well-shaped  ;  the  forehead  well-formed.  He 
will  receive  a  very  complete  organ  of  manhood.  He 
will  have  the  advantage  that  the  Tathagata  renders 
sermons  intelligible  ^  to  him  and  soon  come  in  con- 
nection with  Lords,  Buddhas.  Mark,  A^ita,  how 
much  good  is  produced  by  one's  inciting  were  it  but 
a  single  creature ;  how  much  more  then  by  him  who 
reverentially  hears,  reverentially  reads,  reverentially 
preaches,  reverentially  promulgates  the  law  ! 

And  on  that  occasion  the  Lord  uttered  the  fol- 
lowing stanzas  : 

2.  Listen  how  great  the  merit  is  of  one  who, 
the  fiftieth  in  the  series  (of  tradition),  hears  a  single 
stanza  from  this  Sdtra  and  with  placid  mind  joyfully 
adopts  it. 

3.  Suppose  there  is  a  man  in  the  habit  of  giving 


^  Burnouf  has  some  terms  wanting  in  my  text ;  they  have  been 
added  by  a  later  hand  in  the  margin,  but  the  characters  are 
indistinct. 

^  Pra«itamukhama«</ala;  a  marginal  reading  has  priwa- 
mukha°. 

*  Tathagataw  -^avavadanubhasakawz  pratilabhate.  I  am  not  sure 
of  the  real  meaning  ofanubhasaka;  it  may  as  well  be  *  suggest- 
ing.' Burnouf  has, '  c'est  de  la  bouche  du  Tathagata  qu'il  reeevra 
les  avis  et  I'enseignement.' 


334  SADDHARMA-PUiVZJARIKA.  XYII. 


alms  to  myriads  of  ko/is  of  beings,  whom  I  have 
herebefore  indicated  by  way  of  comparison  ^ ;  all  of 
them  he  satisfies  during  eighty  years. 

4.  Then  seeing  that  old  age  has  approached  for 
them,  that  their  brow  is  wrinkled  and  their  head 
grey  (he  thinks) :  Alas,  how  all  beings  come  to  de- 
cay !  Let  me  therefore  admonish  them  by  (speaking 
of)  the  law. 

5.  He  teaches  them  the  law  here  on  earth  and 
points  to  the  state  of  Nirva?/a  hereafter.  *  All 
existences '  (he  says)  '  are  like  a  mirage ;  hasten  to 
become  disgusted  with  all  existence.' 

6.  All  creatures,  by  hearing  the  law  from  that 
charitable  person,  become  at  once  Arhats,  free  from 
imperfections,  and  living  their  last  life. 

7.  Much  more  merit  than  by  that  person  will  be 
acquired  by  him  who  through  unbroken  tradition 
shall  hear  were  it  but  a  single  stanza  and  joyfully 
receive  it.  The  mass  of  merit  of  the  former  is  not 
even  so  much  as  a  small  particle  of  the  latter's. 

8.  So  great  will  be  one's  merit,  endless,  immea- 
surable, owing  to  one's  hearing  merely  a  single 
stanza,  in  regular  tradition ;  how  much  more  then  if 
one  hears  from  face  to  face ! 

9.  And  if  somebody  exhorts  were  it  but  a  single 
creature  and  says  :  Go,  hear  the  law,  for  this  Sutra 
is  rare  in  many  myriads  of  ko/is  of  ^ons  ; 

10.  And  if  the  creature  so  exhorted  should  hear 
the  Sutra  even  for  a  moment,  hark  what  fruit  is  to 
result  from  that  action.  He  shall  never  have  a 
mouth  disease ; 


'  From  this  reference  to  the  preceding  prose  we  must  gather  that 
these  stanzas  are  posterior  to  or  coeval  with  the  prose  version. 


XVII.      MERITORIOUSNESS  OF  JOYFUL  ACCEPTANCE.      335 

11.  His  tongue  is  never  sore;  his  teeth  shall 
never  fall  out,  never  be  black,  yellow,  unequal ;  his 
lips  never  become  loathsome  ; 

12.  His  face  is  not  wry,  nor  lean,  nor  long;  his 
nose  not  flat ;  it  is  well-shaped,  as  well  as  his  fore- 
head, teeth,  lips,  and  round  face. 

13.  His  aspect  is  ever  pleasant  to  men  ;  his 
mouth  is  never  fetid,  it  constantly  emits  a  smell 
sweet  as  the  lotus. 

14.  If  some  wise  man,  to  hear  this  Sutra,  goes 
from  his  home  to  a  monastery  and  there  listen,  were 
it  but  for  a  single  moment,  with  a  placid  mind,  hear 
what  results  from  it. 

15.  His  body  is  very  fair;  he  drives  with  horse- 
carriages,  that  wise  man,  and  is  mounted  on  elevated 
carriages  drawn  by  elephants  and  variegated  with 
gems. 

16.  He  possesses  litters  covered  with  ornaments 
and  carried  by  numerous  men.  Such  is  the  blessed 
fruit  of  his  going  to  hear  preaching. 

1 7.  Owing  to  the  performance  of  that  pious  work 
he  shall,  when  sitting  in  the  assembly  there,  obtain 
seats  of  Indra,  seats  of  Brahma,  seats  of  kings  ^. 


^  The  purport  of  this  passage  seems  to  be  that  lay  devotees  who 
are  regular  in  attending  the  sermon,  besides  receiving  terrestrial 
blessings,  will  rank  high  as  churchwardens  and  be  entitled  to  con- 
spicuous places  apart  in  the  chapel.  The  gist  of  the  whole  chapter, 
at  any  rate,  is  that  it  is  highly  meritorious  to  come  to  church. 


336  SADDHARMA-PUA^DARIKA.  XYIII. 


CHAPTER  XVIII. 

THE    ADVANTAGES    OF    A    RELIGIOUS    PREACHER ^ 

The  Lord  then  addressed  the  Bodhisattva  Maha- 
sattva  Satatasamitabhiyukta  (i.e.  ever  and  constantly 
strenuous).  Any  one,  young  man  of  good  family, 
who  shall  keep,  read,  teach,  write  this  Dharmapar- 
yaya  or  have  it  written,  let  that  person  be  a  young 
man  of  good  family  or  a  young  lady  ^  shall  obtain 
eight  hundred  good  qualities  of  the  eye,  twelve 
hundred  of  the  ear,  eight  hundred  of  the  nose, 
twelve  hundred  of  the  tongue,  eight  hundred  of  the 
body,  twelve  hundred  of  the  mind^  By  these 
many  hundred  good  qualities  the  whole  of  the  six 
organs  shall  be  perfect,  thoroughly  perfect.  By  means 
of  the  natural,  carnal  eye  derived  from  his  parents 
being  perfect,  he  shall  see  the  whole  triple  universe, 


^  Dharmabha^akanr/i-a^wsa/z.  The  use  of  a.nrisamsa.,  as 
a  synonym  to  gu«a,  is  not  limited  to  Buddhist  writings,  as  we 
see  from  the  inscription  at  Bassac  in  Camboja,  st.  i8.  It  is,  of 
course,  the  Pali  anisaz?isa. 

^  The  words  'or  a  young  lady'  are  wanting  in  my  MS.,  but 
Burnouf  s  text  had  them,  and  from  the  sequel  it  would  seem  that 
they  have  to  be  added.  It  is  certainly  remarkable  that  we  find 
mention  being  made  of  female  preachers,  who  may  be  compared 
with  the  brahmavadinis  of  ancient  times,  and,  further  up, 
with  the  wise  women  of  the  Teutons,  the  Velledas  and  Volvas, 
the  Pythonissas  of  the  Greeks,  and  the  Valians  of  the  Indian 
Archipelago. 

3  We  may  also  render,  of  sight,  hearing,  smell,  taste,  touch, 
and  thought. 


XVIII.       ADVANTAGES  OF  A  RELIGIOUS  PREACHER.         ^,2)7 

outwardly  and  inwardly,  with  its  mountains  and  woody 
thickets,  down  to  the  great  hell  Avi/'i  and  up  to  the 
extremity  of  existence.  All  that  he  shall  see  with 
his  natural  eye,  as  well  as  the  creatures  to  be  found 
in  it,  and  he  shall  know  the  fruit  of  their  works. 

And  on  that  occasion  the  Lord  uttered  the  follow- 
ing stanzas : 

1.  Hear  from  me  what  good  qualities  shall  belong 
to  him  who  unhesitatingly  and  undismayed  shall 
preach  this  Sutra  to  the  congregated  assembly. 

2.  First,  then,  his  eye  (or,  organ  of  vision)  shall 
possess  eight  hundred  good  qualities  by  which  it 
shall  be  correct,  clear,  and  untroubled. 

3.  With  the  carnal  eye  derived  from  his  parents 
he  shall  see  the  whole  world  from  within  and 
without. 

4.  He  shall  see  the  Meru  and  Sumeru,  all  the 
horizon  and  other  mountains,  as  well  as  the  seas. 

5.  He,  the  hero,  sees  all,  downward  to  the  Avi/^i 
and  upward  to  the  extremity  of  existence.  Such  is 
his  carnal  eye. 

6.  But  he  has  not  yet  got  the  divine  eye,  it  having 
not  yet  been  produced^  in  him ;  such  as  here  de- 
scribed is  the  range  of  his  carnal  eye. 

Further,  Satatasamitabhiyukta,  the  young  man  of 
good  family  or  the  young  lady  ^  who  proclaims  this 
Dharmaparyaya  and  preaches  it  to  others,  is  pos- 
sessed of  the  twelve  hundred  good  qualities  of  the 
ear.  The  various  sounds  that  are  uttered  in  the 
triple  universe,  downward   to   the  great  hell  Avi/^i 

^  No  Hpi  ^ayate.  Burnouf's  translation,  '  il  n'aura  pas  encore 
la  science,'  points  to  a  reading,  ^wayate. 

^  This  time  the  word  is  also  found  in  my  MS. 
[21]  Z 


338  SADDHARMA-PUJVZJARIKA.  XVIII. 


and  upward  to  the  extremity  of  existence,  within  and 

without,  such  as  the  sounds  of  horses  \  elephants, 

cows,  peasants  ^,  goats,  cars ;  the  sounds  of  weeping 

and  waiHng ;  of  horror,  of  conch-trumpets,  bells,  tym- 

bals  ;  of  playing  and  singing ;  of  camels,  of  tigers  ^  of 

women,  men,  boys,  girls  ;  of  righteousness  (piety)  and 

unrighteousness  (impiety)  ;  of  pleasure  and  pain  ;  of 

ignorant  men  and  aryas;  pleasant  and  unpleasant 

sounds  ;  sounds  of  gods,  Nagas,  goblins,  Gandharvas, 

demons,  Garu^as,  Kinnaras,  great  serpents,  men,  and 

beings  not  human  ;  of  monks,  disciples,  Pratyekabud- 

dhas,  Bodhisattvas,  and  Tathagatas  ;  as  many  sounds 

as  are  uttered  in  the  triple  world,  within  and  without, 

all  those  he  hears  with  his  natural  organ  of  hearing 

when  perfect.     Still  he   does   not  enjoy  the   divine 

ear,  although   he   apprehends  the   sounds  of  those 

different  creatures,  understands,  discerns  the  sounds 

of    those    different    creatures,    and   when   with    his 

natural  organ  of  hearing  he    hears  the  sounds   of 

those  creatures,  his  ear  is  not  overpowered  by  any 

of  those  sounds.     Such,  Satatasamitabhiyukta,  is  the 

organ  of  hearing  that  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  ^ 

acquires ;  yet  he  does  not  possess  the  divine  ear. 


^  Burnouf's  version  shows  a  few  unimportant  various  readings. 

2  (?anapada«s-abda>^,  rather  strange  between  the  others.  I  sup- 
pose that  ^^'anapada  is  corrupted  from  some  word  meaning  a 
sheep,  but  I  find  no  nearer  approach  to  it  than  ^alakini,  a  ewe; 
cf.  St.  8  below. 

^  I  follow  Burnouf,  who  must  have  read  vyaghra;  my  MS.  has 
vadya. 

*  This  term,  as  it  is  here  used,  refers,  so  far  as  I  can  see,  to 
the  ministers  of  religion,  the  preachers.  It  is,  however,  just  pos- 
sible that  we  have  to  take  it  in  the  more  general  and  original 
sense  of  any  '  rational  being,'  for  all  the  advantages  enumerated 
belong  to  everybody  who  is  not  blind,  not  deaf,  &c. 


XVIII.       ADVANTAGES  OF  A  RELIGIOUS  PREACHER.       339 

Thus  Spoke  the  Lord ;  thereafter  he,  the  Sugata, 
the  Master,  added  : 

7.  The  organ  of  hearing  of  such  a  person  becomes 
(or,  is)  cleared  and  perfect,  though  as  yet  it  be 
natural ;  by  it  he  perceives  the  various  sounds,  with- 
out any  exception,  in  this  world. 

8.  He  perceives  the  sounds  of  elephants,  horses, 
cars,  cows,  goats,  and  sheep ;  of  noisy  kettle-drums, 
tabours,  lutes,  flutes,  Vallaki-lutes. 

9.  He  can  hear  singing,  lovely  and  sweet,  and,  at 
the  same  time,  is  constant  enough  not  to  allow  him- 
self to  be  beguiled  by  it ;  he  perceives  the  sounds 
of  kofis  of  men,  whatever  and  wherever  they  are 
speaking. 

10.  He,  moreover,  always  hears  the  voice  of  gods 
and  Nagas  ;  he  hears  the  tunes,  sweet  and  affecting, 
of  song,  as  well  as  the  voices  of  men  and  women, 
boys  and  girls. 

11.  He  hears  the  cries  of  the  denizens  of  moun- 
tains and  glens ;  the  tender  notes  ^  of  Kalaviiikas, 
cuckoos  ^,  peafowls  ^,  pheasants,  and  other  birds. 

12.  He  also  (hears)  the  heart-rending  cries  of 
those  who  are  suffering  pains  in  the  hells,  and  the 
yells  uttered  by  the  Spirits,  vexed  as  they  are  by 
the  difficulty  to  get  food  ; 

13.  Likewise  the  different  cries  produced  by  the 
demons  and  the  inhabitants  of  the  ocean.     All  these 


^  Valgujabda. 

^  Here  we  see  that  kalavihkas  are  distinguished  fromkokilas, 
cuckoos. 

^  The  voice  of  the  peafowl  is  proverbially  unharmonious,  but 
that  is  no  reason  why  the  poet  should  have  omitted  this  item  from 
his  enumeration ;  such  peculiarities  give  a  relish  to  this  kind  of 
spiritual  poetry. 

Z    2 


;40  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  XVIII. 


sounds  the  preacher  is  able  to  hear  from  his  place 
on  earth,  without  being  overpowered  by  them. 

14.  From  where  he  is  stationed  here  on  the  earth 
he  also  hears  the  different  and  multifarious  sounds 
through  which  the  inhabitants  of  the  realm  of  brutes 
are  conversing  with  each  other, 

15.  He  apprehends  all  the  sounds,  without  any 
exception,  whereby  the  numerous  angels  living  in 
the  Brahma-world,  the  Akanish//^as  and  Abha- 
svaras^,  call  one  another, 

16.  He  likewise  always  hears  the  sound  which 
the  monks  on  earth  are  raising  when  engaged  in 
reading,  and  when  preaching  the  law  to  congrega- 
tions, after  having  taken  orders  under  the  command 
of  the  Sugatas. 

17.  And  when  the  Bodhisattvas  here  on  earth 
have  a  reading  tog^ether  and  raise  their  voices  in 
the  general  synods,  he  hears  them  severally. 

18.  The  Bodhisattva  who  preaches  this  Sutra 
shall,  a:  one  time,  also  hear  the  perfect  law  ^  that 
the  Lord  Buddha,  the  tamer  of  men  ^  announces  to 
the  assemblies. 

19.  The  numerous  sounds  produced  by  all  beings 
in  the  triple  world,  in  this  field,  within  and  without, 
(downward)  to  the  Avi/^i  and  upward  to  the  extremity 
of  existence,  are  heard  by  him, 

20.  (In  short),  he  perceives  the  voices  of  all  beings, 
his  ear  being  open.  Being  in  the  possession  of  his 
six  senses  *,  he  will  discern  the  different  sources  (of 
sound),  and  that  while  his  organ  of  hearing  is  the 
natural  one ; 

^  Two  classes  of  angels  of  the  Brahma-heaven. 

*  I.  e.  judgment,  ^  I.  e.  in  his  quality  of  Dharmar%a. 

*  I.  e.  not  bein;?  out  of  his  wits. 


XYIII.       ADVANTAGES  OF  A  RELIGIOUS  PREACHER.         34! 

21.  The  divine  ear  is  not  yet  operating  in  him; 
his  ear  continues  in  its  natural  state.  Such  as  here 
told  are  the  good  qualities  belonging  to  the  wise 
man  who  shall  be  a  keeper  of  this  Siitra. 

Further,  Satatasamitabhiyukta,  the  Bodhisattva 
Mahasattva  who  keeps,  proclaims,  studies,  writes 
this  Dharmaparyaya  becomes  possessed  of  a  perfect 
organ  of  smell  with  eight  hundred  good  qualities. 
,  By  means  of  that  organ  he  smells  the  different  smells 
that  are  found  in  the  triple  world,  within  and  with- 
out, such  as  fetid  smells,  pleasant  and  unpleasant 
smells,  the  fragrance  of  diverse  flowers,  as  the  great- 
flowered  jasmine,  Arabian  jasmine,  Michelia  Cham- 
paka,  trumpet-flower ;  likewise  the  different  scents  of 
aquatic  flowers,  as  the  blue  lotus,  red  lotus,  white 
esculent  water-lily  and  white  lotus.  He  smells  the 
odour  of  fruits  and  blossoms  of  various  trees  bearing 
fruits  and  blossoms,  such  as  sandal,  Xanthochymus, 
Tabernsemontana,  aorallochum^  The  manifold  hun- 
dred-thousand  mixtures  of  perfumes  he  smells  and  dis- 
cerns, without  moving  from  his  standing-place.  He 
smells  the  diverse  smells  of  creatures,  as  elephants, 
horses,  cows,  goats,  beasts,  as  well  as  the  smell 
issuing  from  the  body  of  various  living  beings  in 
the  condition  of  brutes.  He  perceives  the  smells 
exhaled  by  the  body  of  women  and  men,  of  boys 
and  girls.  He  smells,  even  from  a  distance,  the 
odour  of  grass,  bushes,  herbs,  trees.  He  perceives 
those  smells  such  as  they  really  are,  and  is  not 
surprised  nor  stunned  by  them.  Staying  on  this 
very  earth   he   smells   the  odour  of  gods  and   the 


^  There  is  something  strange  in  enumerating  these  plants,  after 
speaking  of  fruits. 


342  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARiKA.  XVIII. 

fragrance    of   celestial   flowers,    such    as    Erythrina, 
Bauhinia,  Mandarava  and  great  Mandarava,  Ma^^^u- 
sha  and  great  Ma^^^^usha.     He  smells  the  perfume 
of  the  divine  powders  of  sandal  and  agallochum,  as 
well  as  that  of  the  hundred-thousands  of  mixtures 
of  different  divine  flowers.      He   smells   the   odour 
exhaled  by  the  body  of  the  gods,  such  as  Indra,  the 
chief  of  the  gods,  and  thereby  knows  whether  (the 
god)  is  sporting,   playing,  and   enjoying  himself  in 
his  palace  Vai^ayanta  or  is  speaking  the  law  to  the 
gods  of  paradise  in  the  assembly-hall  of  the  gods, 
Sudharma,  or  is  resorting  to  the  pleasure-park  for 
sports     He  smells  the  odour  proceeding  from  the 
body  of  the  sundry  other  gods,  as  well  as  that  pro- 
ceeding from  the  girls  and  wives  of  the  gods,  from 
the  youths  and  maidens  amongst  the  gods,  without 
being   surprised    or  stunned  by  those   smells.     He 
likewise  smells  the  odour  exhaled  by  the  bodies  of 
all  Devanikayas,  Brahmakayikas,  and  Mahabrahmas  ^. 
In  the  same  manner  he  perceives  the  smells  coming 
from  disciples,   Pratyekabuddhas,  Bodhlsattvas,  and 
Tathagatas.     He  smells  the  odour  arising  from  the 
seats  of  the  Tathagatas  and  so  discovers  where  those 
Tathagatas,  Arhats,  &c.  abide.     And   by  none    of 
all  those  different  smells  is  his  organ  of  smell  hin- 
dered, impaired,  or  vexed ;  and,  if  required,  he  may 
give  an  account  of  those  smells  to  others  without 
his  memory  being  impaired  by  it. 

And  on  that  occasion  the  Lord  uttered  the   fol- 
lowing stanzas  : 

2  2.   His  organ  of  smell   is  quite  correct,  and  he 

^  The  parallel  passage  in  the  poetical  version,  st.  41,  is  much 
less  confused,  and  for  that  reason  probably  more  original. 
^  Three  classes  of  aerial  beings,  archangels. 


XVIII.       ADVANTAGES  OF  A  RELIGIOUS  PREACHER.        343 

perceives  the  manifold  and  various  smells,  good  or 
bad,  which  exist  in  this  world ; 

23.  The  fragrance  of  the  great-flowered  jasmine, 
Arabian  jasmine,  Xanthochymus,  sandal,  agallochum, 
of  several  blossoms  and  fruits. 

24.  He  likewise  perceives  the  smells  exhaled  by 
men,  women,  boys,  and  girls,  at  a  considerable  dis- 
tance, and  by  the  smell  he  knows  where  they  are. 

25.  He  recognises  emperors,  rulers  of  armies, 
governors  of  provinces,  as  well  as  royal  princes 
and  ministers,  and  all  the  ladies  of  the  harem  by 
their  (peculiar)  scent. 

26.  It  is  by  the  odour  that  the  Bodhisattva  dis- 
covers sundry  jewels  of  things,  such  as  are  found  on 
the  earth  and  such  as  serve  as  jewels  for  women. 

27.  That  Bodhisattva  likewise  knows  by  the  odour 
the  various  kinds  of  ornament  that  women  use  for 
their  body,  robes,  wreaths,  and  ointments. 

28.  The  wise  man  who  keeps  this  exalted  Sutra 
recognises,  by  the  power  of  a  good-smelling  organ, 
a  woman  ^  standing,  sitting,  or  lying ;  he  discovers 
wanton  sport  and  magic  power  ^. 

29.  He  perceives  at  once  where  he  stands,  the 
frao-rance  of  scented  oils,  and  the  different  odours  of 
flowers  and  fruits,  and  thereby  knows  from  what 
source  the  odour  proceeds. 

30.  The  discriminating  man  recognises  by  the 
odour  the  numerous  sandal-trees  in  full  blossom  in 
the  glens  of  the  mountains,  as  well  as  all  creatures 
dwellinpf  there. 

31.  All  the  beings  living  within  the   compass  of 


^  Sthiiaw  nishanna;«  jayita;;^  tathaiva. 
2  Kri(/aratim  r/'ddhibala/;^  k,\. 


344  SADDHARMA-PU7VDARIKA.  XVIIT. 

the  horizon  or  dwehing  in  the  depth  of  the  sea  or 
in  the  bosom  of  the  earth  the  discriminating  man 
knows  how  to  distinguish  from  the  (pecuHar)  smell. 

32.  He  discerns  the  gods  and  demons,  and  the 
daughters  of  demons ;  he  discovers  the  sports  of 
demons  and  their  luxury.  Such,  indeed,  is  the 
power  of  his  organ  of  smell. 

;^T,.  By  the  smell  he  tracks  the  abodes  of  the 
quadrupeds  in  the  woods,  lions,  tigers,  elephants, 
snakes,  buffaloes,  cows,  gayals. 

34.  He  infers  from  the  odour,  whether  the  child 
that  women,  languid  from  pregnancy,  bear  in  the 
womb  be  a  boy  or  a  girl. 

35.  He  can  discern  if  a  woman  is  big  with  a  dead 
child  ^;  he  discerns  if  she  is  subject  to  throes  ^  and, 
further,  if  a  woman,  the  pains  being  removed,  shall 
be  delivered  of  a  healthy  boy. 

36.  He  guesses  the  various  designs  of  men,  he 
smells  (so  to  say)  an  air  of  design  3;  he  finds  out  the 
odour  of  passionate,  wicked,  hypocritical,  or  quiet 
persons. 

37.  That  Bodhisattva  by  the  scent  smells  trea- 
sures hidden  in  the  ground,  money,  gold,  bullion, 
silver,  chests,  and  metal  pots  ^ 

38.  Necklaces  of  two  sorts,  gems,  pearls,  nice 
priceless  jewels  he  knows  by  the  scent  ^,  as  well  as 
things  priceless  and  brilliant  in  general. 

39.  That  great  man  from  his  very  place  on  earth 


^  Apannasatva.  ^  Vinamadharma. 

^  Abhiprayagandha. 

^  It  need  hardly  be  remarked  that  'to  smell' is  here  used  in  the 
same  sense  as  in  the  English  saying  '  to  smell  a  rat.' 

^  The  word  gandha  also  means  '  some  resemblance,  faint  like- 
ness, an  air.' 


XVITT.      ADVANTAGES  OF  A  RELIGIOUS  PREACHER.        345 

smells  the  flowers  here  above  (In  the  sky)  with  the 
gods,  such  as  Mandaravas,  Ma/^^ushakas,  and  those 
Q^rowinPf  on  the  coral  tree. 

40.  By  the  power  of  his  organ  of  smell  he,  with- 
out leaving  his  stand  on  earth,  perceives  how  and 
whose  are  the  aerial  cars,  of  lofty,  low,  and  middling 
size,  and  other  brilliant  forms  shooting  ^  (through 
the  firmament). 

41.  He  likewise  finds  out  the  paradise,  the  gods 
(in  the  hall)  of  Sudharma  and  in  the  most  glorious 
palace  of  Vai^ayanta  -,  and  the  angels  who  there  are 
diverting  themselves. 

42.  He  perceives,  here  on  earth,  an  air  of  them ; 
by  the  scent  he  knows  the  angels,  and  where  each 
of  them  is  acting,  standing,  listening,  or  walking. 

43.  That  Bodhisattva  tracks  by  the  scent  the 
houris  who  are  decorated  with  many  flowers,  decked 
with  wreaths  and  ornaments  and  in  full  attire ;  he 
knows  wherever  they  are  dallying  or  staying  at  the 
time. 

44.  By  smell  he  apprehends  the  gods,  Brahmas, 
and  Brahmakayas  moving  on  aerial  cars  aloft,  up- 
wards to  the  extremity  of  existence ;  he  knows 
whether  they  are  absorbed  in  meditation  ^  or  have 
risen  from  it. 


^  ^avanti,  Sansk.  >^yavanti,  altered  by  a  later  hand  into 
bhavanti. 

^  A  sculptured  representation  of  Indra's  palace  of  Vai^ayanta 
and  the  hall  Sudharma  is  found  on  the  bas  reliefs  of  the  Stupa  of 
Bharhut;  see  plate  xvi  in  General  Cunningham's  splendid  work 
on   that  Stupa. 

^  The  real  meaning  is,  perhaps,  to  say  that  he  knows  whether 
those  inhabitants  of  the  empyreum  are  plunged  in  glimmer  or 
disengaged  from  mist,  &c. 


346  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARiKA.  XVIII. 


45.  He  perceives  the  Abhasvara  angels  falling 
(and  shooting)  and  appearing,  even  those  that  he 
never  saw  before.  Such  is  the  organ  of  smell  of  the 
Bodhisattva  who  keeps  this  Sutra. 

46.  The  Bodhisattva  also  recognises  all  monks 
under  the  rule  of  the  Sugata,  who  are  strenuously 
eno-ao-ed  in  their  walks  and  find  their  delight  in  their 
lessons  and  reading. 

47.  Intelligent  as  he  is,  he  discerns  those  among 
the  sons  of  6'ina  who  are  disciples  and  those  who 
used  to  live  at  the  foot  of  trees,  and  he  knows  that 
the  monk  so   and   so  is  staying  in  such  and   such 

a  place. 

48.  The  Bodhisattva  knows  by  the  odour  whether 
other  Bodhisattvas  are  of  good  memory,  meditative, 
delighting  in  their  lessons  and  reading,  and  assi- 
duous in  preaching  to  congregations  \ 

49.  In  whatever  point  of  space  the  Sugata,  the 
great  Seer,  so  benign  and  bounteous,  reveals  the 
law  in  the  midst  of  the  crowd  of  attending  disciples, 
the  Bodhisattva  by  the  odour  recognises  him  as 
the  Lord  of  the  universe. 

50.  Staying  on  earth,  the  Bodhisattva  also  per- 
ceives those  beings  who  hear  the  law  and  rejoice  at 
it,  and  the  whole  assembly  of  the  6^ina. 

51.  Such  is  the  power  of  his  organ  of  smell.  Yet 
it  is  not  the  divine  organ  he  possesses,  but  (the 
natural  one)  prior  to  the  perfect,  divine  faculty  of 
smell. 

Further,  Satatasamitabhiyukta,  the  young  man  of 
good  family  or  the  young  lady  who  keeps,  teaches, 


^  Such  Bodhisattvas   may  be    said   to    stand  in  the  odour  of 
sanctity. 


XVTII.       ADVANTAGES  OF  A  RELIGIOUS  PREACHER.        347 

proclaims,  writes  this  Dharmaparyaya  shall  have 
an  organ  of  taste  possessed  of  twelve  hundred 
good  faculties  of  the  tongue.  All  flavours  he 
takes  on  his  tongue  will  yield  a  divine,  exquisite 
relish.  And  he  tastes  in  such  a  way  that  he  is  not 
to  relish  anything  unpleasant ;  and  even  the  un- 
pleasant flavours  that  are  taken  on  his  tongue  will 
yield  ^  a  divine  relish.  And  whatever  he  shall  preach 
in  the  assembly,  the  creatures  will  be  satisfied  by  it ; 
they  will  be  content,  thoroughly  content,  filled  with 
delight.  A  sweet,  tender,  agreeable,  deep  voice  goes 
out  from  him,  an  amiable  voice  which  goes  to  the 
heart,  at  which  those  creatures  will  be  ravished  and 
charmed ;  and  those  to  whom  he  preaches,  after 
having  heard  his  sweet  voice,  so  tender  and  melo- 
dious, will,  even  (if  they  are)  gods,  be  of  opinion  that 
they  ought  to  go  and  see,  venerate,  and  serve  him 2. 
And  the  angels  and  houris  will  be  of  opinion,  &c. 
The  Indras,  Brahmas,  and  Brahmakayikas  will  be 
of  opinion,  &c.  The  Nagas  and  Naga  girls  will  be  of 
opinion,  &c.  The  demons  and  their  girls  will  be 
of  opinion,  &c.  The  Garu^^as  and  their  girls  will  be 
of  opinion,  &c.  The  Kinnaras  and  their  girls,  the 
great  serpents  and  their  girls,  the  goblins  and  their 
girls,  the  imps  and  their  girls  will  be  of  opinion  that 
they  ought  to  go  and  see,  venerate,  serve  him,  and 
hear  his  sermon,  and  all  will  show  him  honour, 
respect,  esteem,  worship,  reverence,  and  veneration. 
Monks  and  nuns,  male  and  female  lay  devotees  will 
likewise  be  desirous  of  seeing  him.  Kings,  royal 
ppinces,    and   grandees  (or   ministers)  will    also   be 

^  Mokshyante,  properly,  'will  emit.' 

^  In  the  margin  added  jravawaya, '  to  hear.' 


348  SADDHARMA-PUiVKARlKA.  XVIIL 

desirous  of  seeing  him.  Kings  ruling  armies  and 
emperors  possessed  of  the  seven  treasures \  along 
with  the  princes  royal,  ministers,  ladies  of  the  harem, 
and  their  retinue  will  be  desirous  of  seeing  him  and 
paying  him  their  homage.  So  sweet  will  be  the 
speech  delivered  by  that  preacher,  so  truthful  and 
according  to  the  teaching  of  the  Tathagata  will  be  his 
words.  Others  also,  Brahmans  and  laymen,  citizens 
and  peasants,  will  always  and  ever  follow  that 
preacher  till  the  end  of  life.  Even  the  disciples 
of  the  Tathagata  will  be  desirous  of  seeing  him  ; 
likewise  the  Pratyekabuddhas  and  the  Lords  Bud- 
dhas.  And  wherever  that  young  man  of  good  family 
or  young  lady  shall  stay,  there  he  (or  she)  will  preach, 
the  face  turned  to  the  Tathagata,  and  he  (or  she) 
will  be  a  worthy  vessel  of  the  Buddha -qualities. 
Such,  so  pleasant,  so  deep  will  be  the  voice  of  the 
law  going  out  from  him. 

And  on  that  occasion  the  Lord  uttered  the  follow- 
ing stanzas  : 

52.  His  organ  of  taste  is  most  excellent,  and  he 
will  never  relish  anything  of  inferior  flavour  ;  the 
flavours  are  no  sooner  put  on  his  tongue  than  they 
become  divine  and  possessed  of  a  divine  taste ^. 

53.  He  has  a  tender  voice  and  delivers  sweet 
words,  pleasant  to  hear,  agreeable,  charming ;  in  the 

^  The  seven  treasures  or  jewels  of  an  emperor  are  the  wheel, 
the  elephant,  the  horse,  the  gem,  the  empress,  the  major  domo 
(according  to  others,  the  retinue  of  householders),  and  the  viceroy 
or  marshal.  See  Spence  Hardy,  Manual  of  Buddhism,  p.  127; 
Burnouf,  Lotus,  p.  580;  Senart,  L^gende  du  Buddha,  pp.  22-60; 
Lalita-vistara,  pp.  15-19- 

^  Nikshiptamatraj  /C-a  bhavanti  divya  rasena  divyena  samar- 
pitai'  /('a. 


XVIII.       ADVANTAGES  OF  A  RELIGIOUS  PREACHER.        349 

midst  of  the  assembly  he  is  used  to  speak  with  a 
melodious  and  deep  voice. 

54.  And  whosoever  hears  him  when  he  is  deliver- 
ing a  sermon  with  myriads  of  ko/is  of  examples,  feels 
a  great  joy  and  shows  him  an  immense  veneration. 

55.  The  gods,  Nagas,  demons,  and  goblins  always 
long  to  see  him,  and  respectfully  listen  to  his 
preaching.     All  those  good  qualities  are  his. 

56.  If  he  would,  he  might  make  his  voice  heard 
by  the  whole  of  this  world ;  his  voice  is  (so)  fine, 
sweet,  deep,  tender,  and  winning. 

57.  The  emperors  on  earth,  along  with  their 
children  and  wives,  go  to  him  with  the  purpose  of 
honouring  him,  and  listen  all  the  time  to  his  sermon 
with  joined  hands. 

58.  He  is  constantly  followed  by  goblins,  crowds 
of  Nagas,  Gandharvas,  imps,  male  and  female,  who 
honour,  respect,  and  worship  him. 

59.  Brahma  himself  becomes  his  obedient  servant; 
the  gods  I^vara  and  Mahe^vara,  as  well  as  Indra  and 
the  numerous  heavenly  nymphs,  approach  him. 

60.  And  the  Buddhas,  benign  and  merciful  for  the 
world,  along  with  their  disciples,  hearing  his  voice, 
protect  him  by  showing  their  face,  and  feel  satis- 
faction in  hearing  him  preaching. 

Further,  Satatasamitabhiyukta,  the  Bodhisattva 
Mahasattva  who  keeps,  reads,  promulgates,  teaches, 
writes  this  Dharmaparyaya  shall  have  the  eight 
hundred  good  qualities  of  the  body.  It  will  be  pure, 
and  show  a  hue  clear  as  the  lapis  lazuli  ;  it  will  be 
pleasant  to  see  for  the  creatures.  On  that  perfect 
body  he  will  see  the  whole  triple  universe ;  the 
beings  who  in  the  triple  world  disappear  and  appear, 
who  are  low  or  lofty,  of  good  or  of  bad  colour,  in 


350  SADDKARMA-PUiVDARlKA.  XVTTT. 

fortunate  or  In  unfortunate  condition,  as  well  as  the 
beings  dwelling  within  the  circular  plane  of  the 
horizon  and  of  the  great  horizon,  on  the  chief  moun- 
tains Meru  and  Sumeru,  and  the  beings  dwelling 
below  in  the  Aviii  and  upwards  to  the  extremity 
of  existence ;  all  of  them  he  will  see  on  his  own 
body.  The  disciples,  Pratyekabuddhas,  Bodhisattvas, 
and  Tathagatas  dwelling  in  the  triple  universe,  and 
the  law  taught  by  those  Tathagatas  and  the  beings 
serving  the  Tathagatas,  he  will  see  all  of  them  on 
his  own  body,  because  he  receives  the  proper  body 
of  all  those  beings,  and  that  on  account  of  the 
perfectness  of  his  body. 

And  on  that  occasion  the  Lord  uttered  the  follow- 
ing stanzas : 

6 1.  His  body  becomes  thoroughly  pure,  clear 
as  if  consisting  of  lapis  lazuli ;  he  who  keeps  this 
sublime  Sutra  is  always  a  pleasant  sight  for  (all) 
creatures. 

62.  As  on  the  surface  of  a  mirror  an  Image  is 
seen,  so  on  his  body  this  world.  Being  self-born,  he 
sees  no  other  beings \  Such  Is  the  perfectness  of 
his  body. 

63.  Indeed,  all  beings  who  are  in  this  world,  men, 
gods,  demons,  goblins,  the  inhabitants  of  hell,  the 
spirits,  and  the  brute  creation  are  seen  reflected  on 
that  body. 

64.  The  aerial  cars  of  the  gods  up  to  the  ex- 
tremity of  existence,    the    rocks,   the    ridge   of  the. 


^  This  seems  to  mean  that  the  thinking  subject  or  thinking 
power  only  (svayambhu  or  brahma)  has  real  existence,  the 
objects  being  products  from  one's  own  mind.  In  so  far  it  may 
be  said  that  the  thinking  subject  sees  no  other  real  beings. 


XVIII.        ADVANTAGES  OF  A  RELIGIOUS  PREACHER.       35  I 

horizon,  the  Himalaya,  Sumeru,  and  great  Meru,  all 
are  seen  on  that  body. 

65.  He  also  sees  the  Buddhas  on  his  body,  along 
with  the  disciples  and  other  sons  of  Buddha ;  like- 
wise the  Bodhisattvas  who  lead  a  solitary  life,  and 
those  who  preach  the  law  to  congregations. 

66.  Sueh  is  the  perfectness  of  his  body,  though  he 
has  not  yet  obtained  a  divine  body ;  the  natural 
property  of  his  body  is  such. 

Further,  Satatasamitabhiyukta,  th-e  Bodhisattva, 
Mahasattva  who  after  the  complete  extinction  of 
the  Tathagata  keeps,  teaches,  writes,  reads  this 
Dharmaparyaya  shall  have  a  mental  organ  pos- 
sessed of  twelve  hundred  good  qualities  of  intel- 
lect. By  this  perfect  mental  organ  he  will,  even  if 
he  hears  a  single  stanza,  recognise  its  various  mean- 
ings. By  fully  comprehending  the  stanza  he  will 
find  in  it  the  text  to  preach  upon  for  a  month,  for 
four  months,  nay,  for  a  whole  year.  And  the  sermon 
he  preaches  will  not  fade  from  his  memory.  The. 
popular  maxims  of  common  life,  whether  sayings  or 
counsels,  he  will  know  how  to  reconcile  with  the  rules 
of  the  law.  Whatever  creatures  of  this  triple  uni- 
verse are  subject  to  the  mundane  whirl,  in  any  of 
the  six  conditions  of  existence,  he  will  know  their 
thoughts,  doings,  and  movements.  He  will  know 
and  discern  their  motions,  purposes,  and  aims. 
Though  he  has  not  yet  attained  the  state  of  an 
Arya,  his  intellectual  organ  will  be  thoroughly 
perfect.  And  all  he  shall  preach  after  having 
pondered  on  the  interpretation  of  the  law  will  be 
really  true ;  he  speaks  what  all  Tathagatas  have 
spoken,  all  that  has  been  declared  in  the  Sutras  of 
former  6'inas, 


52  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARiKA.  XVIII. 


And  on  that  occasion  the  Lord  uttered  the  fol- 
lowinof  stanzas : 

67.  His  mental  organ  is  perfect,  lucid,  right,  and 
untroubled.  By  it  he  finds  out  the  various  laws, 
low,  high,  and  mean. 

68.  On  hearing  the  contents  of  a  single  stanza, 
the  wise  man  catches  the  manifold  significations 
(hidden)  in  it,  and  he  is  able  for  a  month,  four  months, 
or  even  a  year  to  go  on  expounding  both  its  conven- 
tional and  its  true  sense. 

69.  And  the  beings  living  in  this  world,  within  or 
without,  gods,  men,  demons,  goblins,  Nagas,  brutes, 

70.  The  beings  stationed  in  any  of  the  six  condi- 
tions of  existence,  all  their  thoughts  the  sage  knows 
instantaneously.  These  are  the  advantages  of  keep- 
ingf  this  Sutra. 

71.  He  also  hears  the  holy  sound  of  the  law  which 
the  Buddha,  marked  with  a  hundred  blessed  signs, 
preaches  all  over  the  world,  and  he  catches  what  the 
Buddha  speaks. 

72.  He  reflects  much  on  the  supreme  law,  and 
is  in  the  wont  of  constantly  dilating  upon  it ;  he  is 
never  hesitating.  These  are  the  advantages  of 
keeping  this  Sutra. 

73.  He  knows  the  connections  and  knots  ^;  he 
discerns  in  all  laws  contrarieties-;  he  knows  the 
meaning  and  the  interpretations,  and  expounds  them 
according  to  his  knowledge. 

74.  The  Sutra  which  since  so  long  a  time  has  been 


1  Sandhivisandhi,  I  am  not  sure  of  the  real  purport  of  these 
terms  ;  Burnouf  renders  '  concordances  et  combihaisons.' 

2  Sarveshu  dharmeshu  vilaksha7;ani ;  the  rendering  is  uncertain  ; 
Burnouf  has,  '  ne  voit  entre  toutes  les  lois  aucune  difference.' 


XVTTL        ADVANTAGES  OF  A  RELIGIOUS  PREACHER.        253 

expounded  by  the  ancient  Masters  of  the  world  is 
the  law  which  he,  never  flinching,  is  always  preaching 
in  the  assembly. 

75.  Such  is  the  mental  organ  of  him  who  keeps  or 
reads  this  Sutra ;  he  has  not  yet  the  knowledge  of 
emancipation,  but  one  that  precedes  it. 

76.  He  who  keeps  this  Slitra  of  the  Sugata  stands 
on  the  stage  of  a  master;  he  may  preach  to  all  crea- 
tures and  is  skilful  in  ko/is  of  interpretations. 


[21]  A  a 


354  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARiKA.  XIX. 


CHAPTER   XIX. 

SADAPARIBHdxA. 

The  Lord  then  addressed  the  Bodhisattva  Maha- 
sattva  Mahasthamaprapta.  In  a  similar  way,  Maha- 
sthamaprapta,  one  may  infer  from  what  has  been  said 
that  he  who  rejects  such  a  Dharmaparyaya  as  this, 
who  abuses  monks,  nuns,  lay  devotees  male  or  female, 
keeping  this  Sutra,  insults  them,  treats  them  with 
false  and  harsh  words,  shall  experience  dire  results, 
to  such  an  extent  as  is  impossible  to  express  in 
words.  But  those  that  keep,  read,  comprehend, 
teach,  amply  expound  it  to  others,  shall  experience 
happy  results,  such  as  I  have  already  mentioned : 
they  shall  attain  such  a  perfection  of  the  eye,  ear, 
nose,  tongue,  body,  and  mind  as  just  described. 

In  the  days  of  yore,  Mahasthamaprapta,  at  a  past 
period,  before  incalculable  yEons,  nay,  more  than 
incalculable,  immense,  inconceivable,  and  even  long 
before,  there  appeared  in  the  world  a  Tathagata, 
&c.,  named  Bhishmagar^itasvarara^a,  endowed  with 
science  and  conduct,  a  Sugata,  &c.  &c.,  in  the  ^on 
Vinirbhoga,  in  the  world  Mahasambhava.  Now, 
Mahasthamaprapta,  that  Lord  Bhishmagar^itasvara- 
ra^a,  the  Tathagata,  &c.,  in  that  world  Vinirbhoga, 
showed  the  law  in  the  presence  of  the  world,  in- 
cluding gods,  men,  and  demons ;  the  law  containing 
the  four  noble  truths  and  starting  from  the  chain 
of  causes  and  effects,  tending  to  overcome  birth, 
decrepitude,    sickness,    death,    sorrow,    lamentation, 


XTX.  SADAPARIBHtjTA.  355 

woe,  grief,  despondency,  and  finally  leading  to  Nir- 
va;^a,  he  showed  to  the  disciples ;  the  law  con- 
nected with  the  six  Perfections  of  virtue  and 
terminating  in  the  knowledge  of  the  Omniscient, 
after  the  attainment  of  supreme,  perfect  enlighten- 
ment, he  showed  to  the  Bodhisattvas.  The  lifetime 
of  that  Lord  Bhishmagar^itasvarara^a,  the  Tatha- 
gata,  &c.,  lasted  forty  hundred  thousand  myriads  of 
ko/is  of  /Eons  equal  to  the  sands  of  the  river 
Ganges  \  After  his  complete  extinction  his  true 
law  remained  hundred  thousands  of  myriads  of  ko/is 
of  yEons  equal  to  the  atoms  (contained)  in  Gamhu- 
dvipa,  and  the  counterfeit  of  the  true  law  continued 
hundred  thousands  of  myriads  of  ko/is  of  ^ons 
equal  to  the  dust-atoms  in  the  four  continents.  When 
the  counterfeit  of  the  true  law  of  the  Lord  Bhishma- 
gai^itasvarara^a,  the  Tathagata,  &c.,  after  his  com- 
plete extinction,  had  disappeared  in  the  world  Maha- 
sambhava,  Mahasthamaprapta,  another  Tathagata 
Bhishmagar^itasvararac^a,  Arhat,  &c.,  appeared,  en- 
dowed with  science  and  conduct.  So  in  succession, 
Mahasthamaprapta,  there  arose  in  that  world  Maha- 
sambhava  twenty  hundred  thousand  myriads  of 
ko/is  of  Tathagatas,  &c.,  called  Bhishmagar^ita- 
svararac^a.  At  the  time,  Mahasthamaprapta,  after 
the  complete  extinction  of  the  first  Tathagata 
amono-st  all  those  of  the  name  of  Bhishmag-ar^ita- 
svararaf^a,  Tathagata,  &c.,  endowed  with  science 
and  conduct,  &c.  &c.,  when  his  true  law  had  dis- 
appeared and  the  counterfeit  of  the  true  law  was 


^  According  to  Burnouf :  '  autant  de  centaines  de  mille  de  myri- 
ades  de  ko/is  de  Kalpas  qu'il  y  a  de  grains  de  sable  dans  quarante 
Ganges.' 

A  a  2 


356  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARlKA.  XIX. 


fading ;    when    the  reign    (of  the    law)   was    being 
oppressed   by  proud   monks,  there  was  a  monk,  a 
Bodhisattva  Mahasattva,  called  Sadaparibhdta.    For 
what  reason,  Mahasthamaprapta,   was  that    Bodhi- 
sattva  Mahdsattva  called  Sadaparibhtita?     It  was, 
Mahasthamaprapta,  because  that  Bodhisattva  Maha- 
sattva was  in  the  habit  of  exclaiming  to  every  monk 
or  nun,  male  or  female  lay  devotee,  while  approach- 
ing them  :   I  do  not  contemn  you,  worthies.     You 
deserve  no  contempt,  for  you  all  observe  the  course 
of  duty  of  Bodhisattvas  and  are  to  become  Tathi- 
gatas,    &c.     In   this  way,    Mahasthamaprapta,    that 
Bodhisattva    Mahasattva,    when    a    monk,    did   not 
teach  nor  study ;  the  only  thing  he  did  was,  when- 
ever he  descried  from  afar  a  monk  or  nun,  a  male  or 
female  lay  devotee,  to  approach  them  and  exclaim  : 
I  do  not  contemn  you,  sisters  \     You   deserve    no 
contempt,  for  you  all  observe  the  course  of  duty  of 
Bodhisattvas   and  are    to  become  Tathagatas,  &c. 
So,  Mahasthamaprapta,  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva 
at  that  time  used  to  address  every  monk  or  nun, 
male   or   female  devotee.     But  all  were  extremely 
irritated  and  angry  at  it,  showed  him  their  displea- 
sure,   abused    and    insulted    him :    Why   does    he, 
unasked,  declare  that  he  feels  no,  contempt  for  us  ? 
Just  by  so  doing  he  shows  a  contempt  for  us.     He 
renders   himself    contemptible  ^   by   predicting   our 
future    destiny  to  supreme,  perfect  enlightenment; 
we  do  not  care  for  what  is  not  true.     Many  years, 
Mahasthamaprapta,    went    on    during   which     that 

'  It  may  seem  strange  that  we  find  no  other  word  than  this,  but 
the  reading  of  the  text  cannot  be  challenged. 

2  Paribhutam  atmanawz  karoti,  yad,  &c.  Burnouf  must  have 
followed  a  different  reading. 


XTX.  sadaparibh{jta.  357 

Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  was  being  abused,  but  he 
was  not  angry  at  anybody,  nor  felt  malignity,  and  to 
those  who,  when  he  addressed  them  in  the  said 
manner,  cast  a  clod  or  stick  at  him,  he  loudly  ex- 
claimed from  afar :  I  do  not  contemn  you.  Those 
monks  and  nuns,  male  and  female  lay  devotees, 
being  always  and  ever  addressed  by  him  in  that 
phrase  gave  him  the  (nick)name  of  Sadaparibh^ta^ 

Under  those  circumstances,  Mahasthamaprapta,  the 
Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  SadaparibhClta  happened  to 
hear  this  Dharmaparyaya  of  the  Lotus  of  the  True 
Law  when  the  end  of  his  life  was  impending,  and  the 
moment  of  dying  drawing  near.  It  was  the  Lord 
Bhishmagar^itasvararaga,  the  Tathagata,  &c.,  who 
expounded  this  Dharmaparyaya  in  twenty  times 
twenty  hundred  thousand  myriads  of  ko/is  of  stan- 
zas, which  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Sadapari- 
bhuta  heard  from  a  voice  in  the  sky,  when  the  time 
of  his  death  was  near  at  hand.  On  hearing  that 
voice  from  the  sky,  without  there  appearing  a  person 
speaking,  he  grasped  this  Dharmaparyaya  and 
obtained  the  perfections  already  mentioned :  the 
perfection  of  sight,  hearing,  smell,  taste,  body,  and 
mind.  With  the  attainment  of  these  perfections  he 
at  the  same  time  made  a  vow  to  prolong  his  life  for 
twenty  hundred  thousand  myriads  of  ko/is  of  years, 
and  promulgated  this  Dharmaparyaya  of  the  Lotus 
of  the  True  Law.  And  all  those  proud  beings,  monks, 
nuns,  male  and  female  lay  devotees  to  whom  he  had 
said :  I  do  not  contemn  you,  and  who  had  given 
him  the  name  of  Sadaparibhuta,  became  all  his  fol- 

^  I.e.  both  'always  contemned'  (sada  and  paribhuta)  and 
'always  not-contemned,  never  contemned'  (sada  and  apari- 
bhuta). 


358  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  XIX. 

lowers  to  hear  the  law,  after  they  had  seen  the 
power  and  strength  of  his  sublime  magic  faculties,  of 
his  vow,  of  his  readiness  of  wit,  of  his  wisdom.  All 
those  and  many  hundred  thousand  myriads  of  ko^'is 
of  other  beings  were  by  him  roused  to  supreme, 
perfect  enlightenment. 

Afterwards,  Mahasthamaprapta,  that  Bodhisattva 
Mahasattva  disappeared  from  that  place  and  propi- 
tiated twenty  hundred  ko/is  ^  of  Tathagatas,  &c.,  all 
bearing  the  same  name  of  A'andraprabhasvarara^a, 
under  all  of  whom  he  promulgated  this  Dharmapar- 
yaya.  By  virtue  of  his  previous  root  of  goodness 
he,  in  course  of  time,  propitiated  twenty  hundred 
thousand  myriads  of  ko/is  of  Tathagatas,  &c.,  all 
bearing  the  name  of  Dundubhisvarara^a,  and  under 
all  he  obtained  this  very  Dharmaparyaya  of  the 
Lotus  of  the  True  Law  and  promulgated  it  to  the  four 
classes.  By  virtue  of  his  previous  root  of  goodness 
he  again,  in  course  of  time,  propitiated  twenty  hun- 
dred thousand  myriads  of  ko/is  of  Tathagatas,  &c., 
all  bearing  the  name  of  Meghasvarara^a,  and  under 
all  he  obtained  this  very  Dharmaparyaya  of  the 
Lotus  of  the  True  Law  and  promulgated  it  to  the  four 
classes.  And  under  all  of  them  he  was  possessed  of 
the  afore-mentioned  perfectness  of  sight,  hearing, 
smell,  taste,  body,  and  mind. 

Now,  Mahasthamaprapta,  that  Bodhisattva  Maha- 
sattva Sadaparibhuta,  after  having  honoured,  re- 
spected, esteemed,  worshipped,  venerated,  revered  so 
many  hundred  thousand  myriads  of  ko/is  of  Tatha- 
gatas, and  after  having  acted  in  the  same  way  towards 

^  From  the  sequel  it  appears  that  the  text  ought  to  have '  twenty 
hundred  thousand  myriads  of  ko/is.' 


XIX.  SADAPARIBHUTA.  359 

many  hundred  thousand  myriads  of  ko/is  of  other 
Buddhas,  obtained  under  all  of  them  this  very  Dhar- 
maparyaya  of  the  Lotus  of  the  True  Law,  and  owing 
to  his  former  root  of  goodness  having  come  to  full 
development,  gained  supreme,  perfect  enlightenment. 
Perhaps,   Mahasthamaprapta,  thou  wilt  have  some 
doubt,  uncertainty,  or  misgiving,  and  think  that  he 
who  at  that  time,  at  that  juncture  was  the  Bodhisat- 
tva  Mahasattva  called  Sadaparibhuta  was  one,  and 
he  who  under  the  rule  of  that  Lord  Bhishmagar^i- 
tasvarara^a,  the  Tathagata,  &c.,was  generally  called 
Sadaparibhuta  by  the  four  classes,  by  whom  so  many 
Tathagatas  were  propitiated,  was  another.    But  thou 
shouldst  not  think  so.      For  it  is  myself  who  at  that 
time,  at  that  juncture  was  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasat- 
tva   Sadaparibhuta.      Had  I  not    formerly  grasped 
and  kept  this  Dharmaparyaya,  Mahasthamaprapta,  I 
should  not  so  soon  have  arrived  at  supreme,  perfect 
enlightenment.     It    is    because   I   have  kept,  read, 
preached   this   Dharmaparyaya   (derived)   from   the 
teaching  of  the  ancient  Tathagatas,  &c.,  Mahastha- 
maprapta,  that  I  have  so  soon  arrived  at  supreme, 
perfect   enlightenment.       As    to    the    hundreds    of 
monks,  nuns,  male  and  female  lay  devotees,  Maha- 
sthamaprapta, to  whom  under  that  Lord  the  Bodhi- 
sattva Mahasattva  Sadaparibhuta  promulgated  this 
Dharmaparyaya  by  saying:  I  do  not  contemn  you ;  you 
all  observe  the  course  of  duty  of  Bodhisattvas  ;  you 
are  to  become  Tathagatas,  &c.,  and  in  whom  awoke 
a  feeling  of  malignity  towards  that  Bodhisattva,  they 
in    twenty  hundred   thousand    myriads   of  ko/is  of 
.^ons   never  saw  a  Tathagata,  nor  heard  the  call 
of  the  law,  nor  the  call  of  the  assembly,  and  for  ten 
thousand  ^ons  they  suffered  terrible  pain   in  the 


360  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARiKA.  XIX. 

great  hell  AvU'i.  Thereafter  released  from  the 
ban,  they  by  the  instrumentality  of  that  Bodhisattva 
Mahasattva  were  all  brought  to  full  ripeness  for 
supreme,  perfect  enlightenment.  Perhaps,  Maha- 
sthamaprapta,  thou  wilt  have  some  doubt,  uncer- 
tainty, or  misgiving  as  to  who  at  that  time,  at  that 
juncture  were  the  persons  hooting  and  laughing  at 
the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva.  They  are,  in  this  very 
assembly,  the  five  hundred  Bodhisattvas  headed  by 
Bhadrapala,  the  five  hundred  nuns  following  Si;;/ha- 
/^andra,  the  five  hundred  lay  devotees^  following 
Sugata/^etana,  who  all  of  them  have  been  rendered 
inflexible  in  supreme,  perfect  enlightenment.  So 
greatly  useful  it  is  to  keep  and  preach  this  Dharma- 
paryaya,  as  it  tends  to  result  for  Bodhisattvas  Maha- 
sattvas  in  supreme,  perfect  enlightenment.  Hence, 
Mahasthamaprapta,  the  Bodhisattvas  Mahasattvas 
should,  after  the  complete  extinction  of  the  Tatha- 
gata,  constantly  keep,  read,  and  promulgate  this 
Dharmaparyaya. 

And  on  that  occasion  the  Lord  uttered  the  follow- 
ing stanzas  : 

1.  I  remember  a  past  period,  when  king  Bhish- 
masvara^  the  6^ina,  lived,  very  mighty,  and  revered 
by  gods  and  men,  the  leader  of  men,  gods,  goblins, 
and  giants. 

2.  At  the  time  succeeding  the  complete  extinc- 
tion of  that  6"ina,  when  the  decay  of  the  true  law 

^  Upasaka,  the  masculine  ;  this  does  not  suit,  but  on  the  other 
hand  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  omission  of  male  devotees  is  not 
to  be  accounted  for.  Not  unlikely  some  words  have  been  left  out 
by  inadvertence,  not  only  in  the  Cambridge  MS.,  but  also  in  the 
INISS.  known  to  Burnouf.     Cf.,  however,  st.  9. 

^  Bhishmasvaro  ra^a  ^ino  yadasi. 


XIX.  SADAPARIBHtjTA.  36 1 

was  far  advanced,  there  was  a  monk,  a  Bodhisattva, 
called  by  the  name  of  Sadaparlbhuta. 

3.  Other  monks  and  nuns  who  did  not  believe 
but  in  what  they  saw^  he  would  approach  (and  say): 
I  never  am  to  contemn  you,  for  you  observe  the 
course  leading  to  supreme  enlightenment. 

4.  It  was  his  wont  always  to  utter  those  words, 
which  brought  him  but  abuse  and  taunts  from  their 
part.  At  the  time  when  his  death  was  impending  he 
heard  this  Siitra. 

5.  The  sage,  then,  did  not  expire  ;  he  resolved 
upon^  a  very  long  life,  and  promulgated  this  Sutra 
under  the  rule  of  that  leader. 

6.  And  those  many  (persons)  who  only  acknow- 
ledged the  evidence  of  sensual  perception^  were 
by  him  brought  to  full  ripeness  for  enlightenment. 
Then,  disappearing  from  that  place,  he  propitiated 
thousands  of  ko^is  of  Buddhas. 

7.  Owing  to  the  successive  good  actions  performed 
by  him,  and  to  his  constantly  promulgating  this 
Siitra,  that  son  of  6*ina  reached  enlightenment. 
That  Bodhisattva  then  is  myself,  ^Sakyamuni. 

8.  And  those  persons  who  only  believed  in  per- 
ception by  the  senses'^,  those  monks,  nuns,  male 
and  female  lay  devotees  who  by  the  sage  were 
admonished  of  enlightenment, 

9.  And  who  have  seen  many  ko^is  of  Buddhas, 

^  Upalambhadr/'sh/ina;  I  am  not  sure  of  the  correctness  of 
this  translation ;  Burnouf  renders  it  by  '  qui  ne  voyaient  que  les 
objets  ext^rieurs,'  which  comes  pretty  much  to  the  same. 

^  PratishZ/nhitva  (Sansk.  pratish//^aya)  ka.  sudirgham  ayu^, 
properly  '  having  stood  still  for  a  very  long  time  of  life,' 

^  Upalambhika. 

*  Aupalambhika. 


362  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  XIX 


are  the  monks  here  before  me, — no  less  than  five 
hundred, — nuns,  and  female  lay  devotees  \ 

10.  All  of  them  have  been  by  me  brought  to 
complete  ripeness,  and  after  my  extinction  they  will 
all,  full  of  wisdom,  keep  this  Sutra. 

11.  Not  once  in  many,  inconceivably  many  ko/is 
of  y^ons  has  such  a  Sutra  as  this  been  heard.  There 
are,  indeed,  hundreds  of  ko/is  of  Buddhas,  but  they 
do  not  elucidate  this  Sutra. 

12.  Therefore  let  one  who  has  heard  this  law 
exposed  by  the  Self-born  himself,  and  who  has  re- 
peatedly propitiated  him,  promulgate  this  Sutra  after 
my  extinction  in  this  world. 


The  text  has  upasika/^. 


XX.     TRANSCENDENT  POWER  OF  THE  TATHAGATAS.      ^^^^ 


CHAPTER   XX. 

CONCEPTION   OF  THE  TRANSCENDENT  POWER  OF  THE 

TATHAGATAS. 

Thereupon  those  hundred  thousands  of  myriads 
of  ko/is  of  Bodhisattvas  equal  to  the  dust-atoms  of 
a  macrocosm,  who  had  issued  from  the  gaps  of  the 
earth,  all  stretched  their  joined  hands  towards  the 
Lord,  and  said  unto  him  :  We,  O  Lord,  will,  after 
the  complete  extinction  of  the  Tathagata,  promul- 
gate this  Dharmaparyaya  everywhere  (or  on  every 
occasion)  in  all  Buddha-fields  of  the  Lord,  wherever 
(or  whenever)  the  Lord  shall  be  completely  extinct^ 
We  are  anxious  to  obtain  this  sublime  Dharma- 
paryaya, O  Lord,  in  order  to  keep,  read,  publish, 
and  write  it. 

Thereupon  the  hundred  thousands  of  myriads  of 
ko/is  of  Bodhisattvas,  headed  by  Ma.7l£Visn ;  the 
monks,  nuns,  male  and  female  lay  devotees  living  in 
this  world ;  the  gods,  Nagas,  goblins,  Gandharvas, 
demons,  Garu^as,  Kinnaras,  great  serpents,  men, 
and  beings  not  human,  and  the  many  Bodhisattvas 
Mahasattvas  equal  to  the  sands  of  the  river  Ganges, 
said  unto  the  Lord :  We  also,  O  Lord,  will  promul- 
gate this  Dharmaparyaya  after  the  complete  extinc- 
tion of  the  Tathagata.  While  standing  with  an 
invisible   body   in    the    sky,  O  Lord,  we  will    send 

^  Hence  follows  that  Nirvawa  is  repeatedly  entered  into  by 
the  Lord. 


364  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  XX. 

forth  a  voiced  and  plant  the  roots  of  goodness  of 
such  creatures  as  have  not  (yet)  planted  roots  of 
goodness. 

Then  the  Lord  addressed  the  Bodhlsattva  Maha- 
sattva  Vmsh/aMritra,  followed  by  a  troop,  a  great 
troop,  the  master  of  a  troop,  who  was  the  very  first 
of  those  afore-mentioned  Bodhisattvas  Mahasattvas 
followed  by  a  troop,  a  great  troop,  masters  of  a 
troop  :  Very  well,  Vi^ish/'ai:aritra,  very  well ;  so  you 
should  do  ;  it  is  for  the  sake  of  this  Dharmaparyaya 
that  the  Tathagata  has  brought  you  to  ripeness. 

Thereupon  the  Lord  .Sakyamuni,  the  Tathagata, 
&c.,  and  the  wholly  extinct  Lord  Prabhutaratna,  the 
Tathagata,  &c.,  both  seated  on  the  throne  in  the 
centre  of  the  Stupa^,  commenced  smiling  to  one 
another,  and  from  their  opened  mouths  stretched  out 
their  tongues,  so  that  with  their  tongues  they  reached 
the  Brahma-world,  and  from  those  two  tongues  issued 
many  hundred  thousand  myriads  of  ko/'is  of  rays". 
From  each  of  those  rays  issued  many  hundred  thou- 
sand myriads  of  ko/is  of  Bodhisattvas,  with  gold- 
coloured  bodies  and  possessed  of  the  thirty-two 
characteristic  signs  of  a  great  man,  and  seated  on 
thrones  consistins;  of  the  interior  of  lotuses.     Those 

^  From  this  it  appears  that  the  abode  of  the  monks  &c.  in 
the  assembly  of  the  Lord  -5'akyamuni  is  in  the  sky,  at  least  occa- 
sionally. Their  attribute  of  'an  invisible  body'  shows  them  to 
be  identical  with  the  videhas,  the  incorporeal  ones,  i.  e.  the  spirits 
of  the  blessed  departed,  Arhats,  Muktas,  Pitaras.  The  Pitaras 
form  the  assembly  of  Dharmara^a. 

2  Cf.  Chapter  XL 

^  It  is  quite  true  that  the  moon  as  well  as  the  sun  is  sahasra- 
rai'mi,  possessed  of  thousand  rays,  but  it  is  difficult  to  under- 
stand how  the  Bhagavat  Prabhutaratna  can  show  his  magic  power 
in  his  state  of  extinction. 


XX.     TRANSCENDENT  POWER  OF  THE  TATHAGATAS.      365 

Bodhisattvas  spread  in  all  directions  in  hundred 
thousands  of  worlds,  and  while  on  every  side  sta- 
tioned in  the  sky  preached  the  law.  Just  as  the 
Lord  ^akyamuni,  the  Tathagata,  &c.,  produced  a 
miracle  of  magic  by  his  tongue,  so,  too,  Prabhuta- 
ratna,  the  Tathagata,  &c.,  and  the  other  Tathagatas, 
&c.,  who,  having  flocked  from  hundred  thousands  of 
myriads  of  ko/is  of  other  worlds,  were  seated  on 
thrones  at  the  foot  of  jewel  trees,  by  their  tongues 
produced  a  miracle  of  magic. 

The  Lord  vSakyamuni,  the  Tathagata,  &c.,  and  all 
those  Tathagatas,  &c.,  produced  that  magical  effect 
during  fully  a  thousand^  years.  After  the  lapse  of  that 
millennium  those  Tathagatas,  &c.,  pulled  back  their 
tongue,  and  all  simultaneously,  at  the  same  moment, 
the  same  instant,  made  a  great  noise  as  of  expector- 
ation^  and  of  snapping  the  fingers,  by  which  sounds 
all  the  hundred  thousands  of  myriads  of  ko/is  of 
Buddha-fields  in  every  direction  of  space  were 
moved,  removed,  stirred,  wholly  stirred,  tossed, 
tossed  forward,  tossed  along,  and  all  beings  in  all 
those  Buddha- fields,  gods,  Nagas,  goblins,  Gan- 
dharvas,  demons,  Garurt^as,  Kinnaras,  great  ser- 
pents, men,  and  beings  not  human  beheld,  by  the 
power  of  the  Buddha,  from  the  place  where  they 
stood,  this  Saha-world.  They  beheld  the  hundred 
thousands  of  myriads  of  ko/is  of  Tathagatas  seated 
severally  on  their  throne  at  the  foot  of  a  jewel  tree, 
and  the  Lord  ^S^akyamuni,  the  Tathagata,  &c.,  and 
the  Lord  Prabhutaratna,  the  Tathagata,  &c.,  wholly 
extinct,  sitting  on  the  throne  in  the  centre  of  the 

^  Burnouf  has  '  a  hundred  thousand.' 
^  Utkajana,  better  °sana. 


366  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARiKA.  XX. 

Stupa  of  magnificent  precious  substances,  along  with 
the  Lord  ^akyamuni,  the  Tathagata,  &c. ;  they  be- 
held, finally,  those  four  classes  of  the  audience.  At 
this  sight  they  felt  struck  with  wonder,  amazement, 
and  rapture.  And  they  heard  a  voice  from  the  sky 
calling  :  Worthies,  beyond  a  distance  of  an  immense, 
incalculable  number  of  hundred  thousands  of  myriads 
of  ko/is  of  worlds  there  is  the  world  named  Saha  ; 
there  the  Tathagata  called  ^'akyamuni,  the  Arhat, 
&c.,  is  just  now  revealing  to  the  Bodhisattvas  Maha- 
sattvas  the  Dharmaparyaya  of  the  Lotus  of  the  True 
Law,  a  Sutranta  of  great  extent,  serving  to  instruct 
Bodhisattvas,  and  belonging  in  proper  to  all  Buddhas. 
Ye  accept  it  joyfully  with  all  your  heart,  and  do 
homage  to  the  Lord  6akyamuni,  the  Tathagata,  &c,, 
and  the  Lord  Prabhutaratna,  the  Tathagata,  &c. 

On  hearing  such  a  voice  from  the  sky  all  those 
beings  exclaimed  from  the  place  where  they  stood, 
with  joined  hands :  Homage  to  the  Lord  ^'akya- 
muni,  the  Tathagata.  Then  they  threw  towards 
the  Saha-world  various  flowers,  incense,  fragrant 
wreaths,  ointment,  gold,  cloth,  umbrellas,  flags,  ban- 
ners, and  triumphal  streamers,  as  well  as  ornaments, 
parures,  necklaces,  gems  and  jewels  of  all  sorts,  in 
order  to  worship  the  Lord  ^Sakyamuni,  the  Tatha- 
gata ^  and  this  Dharmaparyaya  of  the  Lotus  of  the 
True  Law.  Those  flowers,  incense,  &c.,  and  those 
necklaces,  &c.,  came  down  upon  this  Saha-world, 
where  they  formed  a  great  canopy  of  flowers  hanging 
in  the  sky  above  the  Tathagatas  there  sitting,  as 
well  as  those  in  the  hundred  thousands  of  myriads 
of  ko/is  of  other  worlds. 


1 


In  Burnoufs  translation  we  find  added  :  and  the  Tathagata 


o"- 


Prabhfitaratna. 


XX.     TRANSCENDENT  POWER  OF  THE  TATHAGATAS.      367 


Thereupon  the  Lord  addressed  the  Bodhisattvas 
Mahasattvas  headed  by  Vl^ish/a/C-aritra :  Inconceivable, 
young  men  of  good  family,  is  the  power  of  the  Tatha- 
gatas,  &c.    In  order  to  transmit  this  Dharmaparyaya, 
young  men  of  good  family,  I  might  go  on  for  hundred 
thousands  of  myriads  of  ko/is  of  ^ons  explainino- 
the  manifold  virtues  of  this  Dharmaparyaya  through 
the  different  principles  of  the  law,  without  reaching 
the  end  of  those  virtues.     In  this  Dharmaparyaya 
I  have  succincdy  taught  all  Buddha-laws  (or  Buddha- 
qualities),  all  the  superiority,  all  the  mystery,  all  the 
profound   conditions    of  the    Buddhas.     Therefore, 
young  men  of  good  family,  you    should,  after  the 
complete  extinction  of  the  Tathagata,  with  reverence 
keep,  read,  promulgate,  cherish  \  worship  it.     And 
wherever  on  earth,  young  men  of  good  family,  this 
Dharmaparyaya  shall  be  made  known,  read,  written, 
meditated,  expounded,  studied  or  collected   into  a 
volume,  be   it  in  a  monastery  or  at  home,  in    the 
wilderness  or  in  a  town,  at  the  foot  of  a  tree  or  in 
a  palace,  in  a  building  or  in  a  cavern,  on  that  spot 
one  should  erect  a  shrine  in  dedication  to  the  Tatha- 
gata.   For  such  a  spot  must  be  regarded  as  a  terrace 
of  enlightenment;    such   a  spot  must  be   regarded 
as  one  where  all  Tathagatas  &c.  have  arrived  at 
supreme,  perfect  enlightenment ;   on  that  spot  have 
all  Tathagatas  moved  forward  the  wheel  of  the  law  ; 
on  that  spot  one  may  hold  that  all  Tathagatas  have 
reached  complete  extinction. 

And  on  that  occasion  the  Lord  uttered  the  follow- 


mg  stanzas 


^  Or  develop;  or  meditate,  bhavayitavy a.     Burnouf  seems  to 
have  read  bhashayitavya,  for  he  translates  it  by  'expliquer.' 


368  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARtlvA.  XX. 

1.  Inconceivable  Is  the  power  to  promote  the 
weal  of  the  world  ^  possessed  by  those  who,  firmly 
established  in  transcendent  knowledge,  by  means  of 
their  unlimited  sight  display  their  magic  faculty  in 
order  to  gladden  all  living  beings  on  earth. 

2.  They  extend  their  tongue  over  the  whole 
world  ^,  darting  thousands  of  beams  to  the  astonish- 
ment of  those  to  whom  this  effect  of  magic  is  dis- 
played and  who  are  making  for  supreme  enlighten- 
ment. 

3.  The  Buddhas  made  a  noise  of  expectoration 
and  of  snapping  the  fingers,  (and  by  it)  called  the 
attention  of  the  whole  world,  of  all  parts  of  the  world 
in  the  ten  directions  of  space. 

4.  Those  and  other  miraculous  qualities  they 
display  In  their  benevolence  and  compassion  (with 
the  view)  that  the  creatures,  gladly  excited  at  the 
time,  may  (also)  keep  the  Statra  after  the  complete 
extinction  of  the  Sugata. 

5.  Even  If  I  continued  for  thousands  of  ko/is  of 
^ons  speaking  the  praise  of  those  sons  of  Sugata 
who  shall  keep  this  eminent  Sutra  after  the  extinc- 
tion of  the  Leader  of  the  world, 

6.  I  should  not  have  terminated  the  enumeration 
of  their  qualities ;  Inconceivable  as  the  qualities  of 
infinite  space  are  the  merits  of  those  who  constantly 
keep  this  holy  Sutra. 

7.  They  behold  me  as  well  as  these  chiefs,  and 
the  Leader  of  the  world  now  extinct;  (they  behold)  all 
these  numerous  Bodhisattvas  and  the  four  classes. 

8.  Such  a  one  now  here  ^  propitiates  me  and  all 

^  Lokahitanudharmata.  ^  Sarvalokam. 

'  Ten'ihadya.  The  connection  between  this  stanza  and  the  next 
would  have  been  clearer  if  the  two  stanzas  had  been  transposed. 


XX.      TRANSCENDENT  POWER  OF  THE  TATHAGATAS.      369 

these  leaders,  as  well  as  the  extinct  chief  of  6^inas 
and  the  others  in  every  quarter. 

9.  The  future  and  past  Buddhas  stationed  in  the 
ten  points  of  space  will  all  be  seen  and  worshipped 
by  him  who  keeps  this  Siitra. 

10.  He  who  keeps  this  Sutra,  the  veritable  law, 
will  fathom  the  mystery  of  the  highest  man  ;  will 
soon  comprehend  what  truth  it  was  that  was  arrived 
at  on  the  terrace  of  enlightenment. 

11.  The  quickness  of  his  apprehension  will  be 
unlimited ;  like  the  wind  he  will  nowhere  meet  im- 
pediments ;  he  knows  the  purport  and  interpretation 
of  the  law,  he  who  keeps  this  exalted  Sutra. 

12.  He  will,  after  some  reflection,  always  find  out 
the  connection  of  the  Stitras  spoken  by  the  leaders  ; 
even  after  the  complete  extinction  of  the  leader  he 
will  grasp  the  real  meaning  of  the  Sutras. 

13.  He  resembles  the  moon  and  the  sun;  he  illu- 
minates all  around  him,  and  while  roaming  the  earth 
in  different  directions  he  rouses  many  Bodhisattvas. 

14.  The  wise  Bodhisattvas  who,  after  hearing  the 
enumeration  of  such  advantages,  shall  keep  this 
Sutra  after  my  complete  extinction  will  doubtless 
reach  enlightenment. 


[21]  B  b 


1  /O  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  XXI. 


CHAPTER  XXI. 


SPELLS. 


Thereupon  the  Bodhlsattva  Mahasattva  Bhaisha- 
^yara^a  rose  from  his  seat,  and  having  put  his  upper 
robe  upon  one  shoulder  and  fixed  the  right  knee 
upon  the  ground  Hfted  his  joined  hands  up  to  the 
Lord  and  said  :  How  great,  O  Lord,  is  the  pious 
merit  which  will  be  produced  by  a  young  man  of 
good  family  or  a  young  lady  who  keeps  this  Dhar- 
maparyaya  of  the  Lotus  of  the  True  Law,  either 
in  memory  or  in  a  book  ?  Whereupon  the  Lord 
said  to  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Bhaisha^yaraj^a : 
Suppose,  Bhaisha^yara^a,  that  some  man  of  good 
family  or  a  young  lady  honours,  respects,  reveres, 
worships  hundred  thousands  of  myriads  of  ko/is  of 
Tathagatas  equal  to  the  sands  of  eighty  Ganges 
rivers ;  dost  thou  think,  Bhaisha^yara^a,  that  such  a 
young  man  or  young  lady  of  good  family  will  on 
that  account  produce  much  pious  merit  ?  The  Bo- 
dhisattva Bhaisha^yara^a  replied  :  Yes,  Lord  ;  yes, 
Sugata.  The  Lord  said :  I  announce  to  thee,  Bhaisha- 
^ara^a,  I  declare  to  thee  :  any  young  man  or  young 
lady  of  good  family,  Bhaisha^ara^a,  who  shall  keep, 
read,  comprehend,  and  in  practice  follow,  were  it 
but  a  single  stanza  from  this  Dharmaparyaya  of  the 
Lotus  of  the  True  Law,  that  young  man  or  young 
lady  of  good  family,  Bhaisha^yara^a,  will  on  that 
account  produce  far  more  pious  merit. 


XXI.  SPELLS.  3  7 1 

Then  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Bhaishac^ya- 
ra^a  immediately  said  to  the  Lord  :  To  those  young 
men  or  young  ladies  of  good  family,  O  Lord,  who 
keep  this  Dharmaparyaya  of  the  Lotus  of  the  True 
Law  in  their  memory  or  in  a  book,  we  will  give 
talismanic  words  ^  for  guard,  defence,  and  protection  ; 
such  as,  anye  ^  manye  mane  mamane  /^itte  /^arite 
same,  samitavi,  sante,  mukte,  muktatame,  same 
avishame,  samasame,  ^^aye,  kshaye,  akshme,  sante 
sani,  dhara/^i  alokabhashe,  pratyaveksha/^i,  nidhini, 
abhyantaravisish/e,  utkule  mutkule,  asa^e,  parage, 
sukahkshi,  asamasame,  buddhavilokite,  dharmapa- 
rikshite,  sahghanirghosha/^i,  nirghosha;/i  bhayabha- 
yasodhani,  mantre  mantrakshayate,  rutakaui^alye, 
akshaye,  akshavanataya,  vakule  valo^a,  amanyataya  ^. 
These  words  of  charms  and  spells,  O  Lord,  have 
been  pronounced  by  reverend  Buddhas  (in  number) 

^  Dharawipadani. 

^  In  giving  these  words  I  have  follovifed  the  Camb.  MS.,  even 
where  the  readings  would  seem  to  be  incorrect. 

^  The  list  in  Burnouf's  translation  seems  in  many  respects  more 
correct ;  it  is  as  follows :  anye  manye,  arau  parau  amane  ma- 
mane /^itte  ^arite  ;  jame  jamita  vi^ante,  mukte  muktatame  same 
avisamasame,  ^aye  kshaye  akshaye  akshi«e  jante  i-amite  dharam 
alokabhase  pratyavekshawi  dhiru  viviru  abhyantaranivish/e  abhyan- 
taraparii-uddhi,  utkule  mukule  araa'e  paracfe  sukaiikshi  asama- 
same buddhivilokite  dharmaparikshite  pratyavekshawi  sahghanir- 
ghosha«i  nirghosha;/i  bhayavijodhani  mantre  mantrakshayate 
rutakaujalya  akshayavanata  vakkulavaloka  amanyataye.  All  these 
words  are,  or  ought  to  be,  feminine  words  in  the  vocative.  I  take 
them  to  be  epithets  of  the  Great  Mother,  Nature  or  Earth, 
differently  called  Aditi,  Pra_§'7ia,  Maya,  Bhavani,  Durga.  Any  a 
may  be  identified  with  the  Vedic  any  a,  inexhauslible,  and 
synonymous  with  aditi.  IMost  of  the  other  terms  may  be  ex- 
plained as  synonymous  with  pragna  (e.g.  pratyavekshawi), 
with  nature  (kshaye  akshaye);  with  the  earth  (dhara;n). 

B  b  2 


372  SADDHARMA-PUA'DARiKA.  XXI. 


equal  to  the  sands  of  sixty-two  Ganges  rivers.  All 
these  Buddhas  would  be  offended  by  any  one  who 
would  attack  such  preachers,  such  keepers  of  the 
Sutranta. 

The  Lord  expressed  his  approval  to  the  Bodhi- 
sattva  Mahasattva  Bhaisha^yara^a  by  saying :  Very 
well,  Bhaisha^ara^a,  by  those  talismanic  words 
being  pronounced  out  of  compassion  for  creatures, 
the  common  weal  of  creatures  is  promoted;  their 
guard,  defence,  and  protection  is  secured. 

Thereupon  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Pradana- 
sdra,  said  unto  the  Lord  :  I  also,  O  Lord,  will,  for  the 
benefit  of  such  preachers,  give  them  talismanic  words, 
that  no  one  seeking  for  an  occasion  to  surprise  such 
preachers  may  find  the  occasion,  be  it  a  demon,  giant, 
goblin,  sorcerer,  imp  or  ghost ;  that  none  of  these 
when  seeking  and  spying  for  an  occasion  to  surprise 
may  find  the  occasion.  And  then  the  Bodhisattva 
Mahasattva  Pradana^-ura  instantly  pronounced  the 
following  words  of  a  spell :  ^vale  maha^ vale,  ukke 
mukke,  a^e  art'avati,  tr//ye  tr/Zyavati,  i/ini  vi/ini 
^i/ini,  tri/fi  t7'//yavati  svaha\  These  talismanic 
words,  O  Lord,  have  been  pronounced  and  approved 
by  Tathagatas,  &c.  (in  number)  equal  to  the  sands 
of  the  river  Ganges.  All  those  Tathagatas  would 
be  offended  by  any  one  who  would  attack  such 
preachers. 

^  With  Burnouf:  ^vale  maha^vale  ukke  mukke  ate  atavati 
nri'tye  nr/tyavati ;  i//ini  vi//ini  /n//ini  nr/tyavati  svaha.  These 
terms  are  obviously  names  of  the  flame,  mythologically  called 
Agni's  wife,  the  daughter  of  Daksha.  As  6'iva  may  be  identified 
with  Agni,  the  feminine  words  again  are  epithets  of  Durga.  (7vala 
and  Maha^vala  are  perfectly  clear;  ukka  is  the  Prakrit  form  of 
Sanskrit  ulka. 


XXI.  SPELLS.  373 

Thereupon  Vaisra.v3.7ia,  one  of  the  four  rulers  of 
the  cardinal  points,  said  unto  the  Lord  :  I  also,  O 
Lord,  will  pronounce  talismanic  words  for  the  benefit 
and  weal  of  those  preachers,  out  of  compassion  to 
them,  for  their  guard,  defence,  and  protection  :  a//e 
naUe  vana//e  anade,  nad'i  kuna(^i  svaha  ^  With 
these  spells,  O  Lord,  I  shall  guard  those  preachers 
over  an  extent  of  a  hundred  yo^anas.  Thus  will 
those  young  men  or  young  ladies  of  good  family, 
who  keep  this  Sutranta,  be  guarded,  be  safe. 

At  that  meeting  was  present  Viru<5%aka,  another 
of  the  four  rulers  of  the  cardinal  points,  sitting  sur- 
rounded and  attended  by  hundred  thousands  of 
myriads  of  ko/is  of  Kumbha;^^as.  He  rose  from 
his  seat,  put  his  upper  robe  upon  one  shoulder,  lifted 
his  joined  hands  up  to  the  Lord,  and  spoke  to  him 
as  follows :  I  also,  O  Lord,  will  pronounce  talismanic 
words  for  the  benefit  of  people  at  large,  and  to  guard, 
defend,  protect  such  preachers  as  are  qualified,  who 
keep  the  Sutranta  as  mentioned ;  viz.  agane  gauQ 
gauri  gandhari  ^atidaVi  mataiigi  pukkai'i  saiikule 
vrusali  svaha  ^.  These  talismanic  words,  O  Lord, 
have  been  pronounced  by  forty-two  hundred  thou- 
sand myriads  of  ko/is  of  Buddhas.  All  those 
Buddhas  would  be  offended  by  any  one  who  would 
attack  such  preachers  as  are  qualified. 

Thereupon  the  giantesses  called  Lamba,Vilam^  a^. 


^  Burnouf  has  a//e  ha//e  na//e,  &c. 

2  The  list  in  Burnouf  differs  but  slightly ;  a.  g.  g.  gandhari 
kinda.\[  m.  pukkasi  s.  vrulasisi  s.  Vrusali  or  rather  vrusali  must 
be  the  Sanskrit  vr /shall.  Gauri,  Kandalika.,  Matahgi  are  known 
from  elsewhere  as  epithets  of  Durga;  Pukkasi  and  Vr/shali  denote 
nearly  the  same  as  Ka?tda\i  and  Matahgi. 

^  With  Burnouf,  Pralamba. 


374  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARlKA.  XXI. 

Ku/adanti,Pushpadanti,  Maku/adantt\  Ke^ini,  A/('ala, 
Maladhari,  Kunti,  Sarvasattvofahari  2,  and  Hartti, 
all  with  their  children  and  suite  went  up  to  the 
place  where  the  Lord  was,  and  with  one  voice  said 
unto  him :  We  also,  O  Lord,  will  afford  guard, 
defence,  and  protection  to  such  preachers  as  keep 
this  Sutranta ;  we  will  afford  them  safety,  that  no 
one  seeking  for  an  occasion  to  surprise  those 
preachers  may  find  the  occasion.  And  the  giantesses 
all  simultaneously  and  in  a  chorus  gave  to  the  Lord 
the  following  words  of  spells  :  iti  me,  iti  me,  iti  me, 
iti  me,  iti  me ;  nime  nime  nime  nime  nime ;  ruhe 
ruhe  ruhe  ruhe  ruhe ;  stuhe  stuhe  stuhe  stuhe  stuhe, 
svaha.  No  one  shall  overpower  and  hurt  such 
preachers ;  no  goblin,  giant,  ghost,  devil,  imp,  sor- 
cerer, spectre,  gnome  ;  no  spirit  causing  epilepsy,  no 
sorcerer  of  goblin  race,  no  sorcerer  of  not-human 
race,  no  sorcerer  of  human  race ;  no  sorcerer  pro- 
ducing tertian  ague,  quartian  ague,  quotidian  ague. 
Even  if  in  his  dreams  he  has  visions  of  women,  men, 
boys  or  girls,  it  shall  be  impossible  that  they  hurt 
him. 

And  the  giantesses  simultaneously  and  in  a  chorus 
addressed  the  Lord  with  the  followine  stanzas  : 

1.  His  head  shall  be  split  into  seven  pieces,  like 
a  sprout  of  Symplocos  Racemosa,  who  after  hearing 
this  spell  would  attack  a  preacher. 

2.  He  shall  go  the  way  of  parricides  and  matri- 
cides, who  would  attack  a  preacher. 

3.  He  shall  go  the  way  of  oil-millers  and  sesamum- 
pounders,  who  would  attack  a  preacher. 


^  Burnouf  has  Ma/uta/^andt. 

^  Burnouf  better,  Sarvasattvau^ohari. 


XXI.  SPELLS.  375 

4.  He  shall  go  the  way  of  those  who  use  false 
weights  and  measures,  who  would  attack  a  preacher. 

Thereafter  the  giantesses  headed  by  Kunti  said 
unto  the  Lord :  We  also,  O  Lord,  will  afford  protec- 
tion to  such  preachers  ;  we  will  procure  them  safety ; 
we  will  protect  them  against  assault  and  poison. 
Whereupon  the  Lord  said  to  those  giantesses  :  Very 
well,  sisters,  very  well ;  you  do  well  in  affording 
guard,  defence,  and  protection  to  those  preachers, 
even  to  such  who  shall  keep  no  more  than  the  name 
of  this  Dharmaparyaya ;  how  much  more  then  to 
those  who  shall  keep  this  Dharmaparyaya  wholly 
and  entirely,  or  who,  possessing  the  text  of  it  in  a 
volume,  honour  it  with  flowers,  incense,  fragrant 
garlands,  ointment,  powder,  cloth,  flags,  banners, 
lamps  with  sesamum  oil,  lamps  with  scented  oil, 
lamps  with  A'ampaka-scented  oil,  with  Varshika- 
scented  oil,  with  lotus-scented  oil,  with  jasmine- 
scented  oil  ;  who  by  such-like  manifold  hundred 
thousand  manners  of  worshipping  shall  honour,  re- 
spect, revere,  venerate  (this  Sutra),  deserve  to  be 
guarded  by  thee  and  thy  suite,  Kunti ! 

And  while  this  chapter  on  spells  was  being 
expounded^,  sixty-eight  thousand  living  beings  re- 
ceived the  faculty  of  acquiescence  in  the  law  that 
has  no  orig-in. 

^  The  chapter  was,  properly  speaking,  not  expounded  at  all ; 
it  simply  contains  a  narrative  with  the  speeches  of  different  inter- 
locutors.   It  may  be  observed  that  a  poetical  version  is  wanting. 


1 


'](i  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARfKA.  XXTI. 


CHAPTER   XXIL 

ANCIENT    DEVOTION  1    OF    BHAISHAGYARAGA. 

Thereupon  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Naksha- 
trara/asarikusumitabhi^/Ia  spoke  to  the  Lord  as  fol- 
lows :  Wherefore,  O  Lord,  does  the  Bodhisattva 
Bhaisha^ara^a  pursue  his  course-  in  this  Saha- 
world,  while  he  is  fully  aware  of  the  many  hundred 
thousands  of  myriads  of  ko/is  of  difficulties  he  has 
to  meet  ?  Let  the  Lord,  the  Tathagata,  &c.,  deign  to 
tell  us  any  part  of  the  course  of  duty  of  the  Bodhi- 
sattva Mahasattva  Bhaisha^yara^a,  that  by  hearing 
it  the  gods,  Nagas,  goblins,  Gandharvas,  demons, 
Garu^as,  Kinnaras,  great  serpents,  men,  and  beings 
not  human,  as  well  as  the  Bodhisattvas  Mahasattvas 
from  other  worlds  here  present,  and  these  great  dis- 
ciples here  may  be  content,  delighted,  overjoyed. 

And  the  Lord,  out  of  regard  to  that  request  of 
the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Nakshatrara^asanku- 
sumitabhi^;^a,  told  him  the  following  :  Of  yore,  young 
man  of  good  family,  at  a  past  epoch,  at  a  time  (as 
many)  ^ons  ago  as  there  are  grains  of  sand  in  the 
river  Ganges,  there  appeared  in  the  world  a  Tatha- 
gata, &c.,  by  the  name  of  A^andravimalasurya- 
prabhasa^-ri  ^,  endowed  with  science  and  conduct,  a 

^  Purvayoga;  cf.  foot-note,  p.  153. 
^  Pravi/^arati. 

^  I.  e.  moon-bright  and  illustrious  by  (or  like)  the  radiance  of 
the  sun. 


XXII.       ANCIENT  DEVOTION  OF  BHAISHAGYARAffA.       'i,']'] 

Sugata,  &c.  &c.  Now  that  Tathagata,  &c.,  A'andra- 
vimalastaryaprabhasam  had  a  great  assembly  of 
eighty  ko/is^  of  Bodhisattvas  Mahasattvas  and  an 
assembly  of  disciples  equal  to  the  sands  of  seventy- 
two  Ganges  rivers.  His  spiritual  rule  was  exempt 
from  the  female  sex,  and  his  Buddha-field  had  no 
hell,  no  brute  creation,  no  ghosts,  no  demons  ;  it  was 
level,  neat,  smooth  as  the  palm  of  the  hand.  Its 
floor  consisted  of  heavenly  lapis  lazuli,  and  it  was 
adorned  with  trees  of  jewel  and  sandal-wood;  inlaid 
with  a  multitude  of  jewels,  and  hung  with  long  bands 
of  silk,  and  scented  by  censors  made  of  jewels.  Under 
each  jewel  tree,  at  a  distance  not  farther  than  a  bow- 
shot, was  made  a  small  jewel-house ^  and  on  the  top 
of  those  small  jewel-houses  stood  a  hundred  ko/is  of 
angels  performing  a  concert  of  musical  instruments 
and  castanets,  in  order  to  honour  the  Lord  A^andra- 
vimalasuryaprabhasa^rt,  the  Tathagata,  &c.,  while 
that  Lord  was  extensively  expounding  this  Dharma- 
paryaya  of  the  Lotus  of  the  True  Law  to  the  great 
disciples  and  Bodhisattvas,  directing  himself^  to  the 
Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Sarvasattvapriyadari'ana. 
Now,  Nakshatrara^asahkusumitabhi^;^a,  the  lifetime 
of  that  Lord  iTandravimalasuryaprabhasai-ri,  the 
Tathagata,  &c.,  lasted  forty-two  thousand  ^ons, 
and  likewise  that  of  the  Bodhisattvas  Mahasattvas 
and  great  disciples.  It  was  under  the  spiritual  rule 
of  that  Lord  that  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Sarva- 

^  Thus  Camb.  MS.;  Burnouf  has  eighty  hundred  thousand 
myriads  of  ko/is. 

^  Ratnadhamaka.  I  am  not  certain  of  the  correctness  of  my 
translation ;  Burnouf  renders  it  by  '  char  fait  de  pierreries.' 

^  Sarvasatvapriyadar5'ana;« — adhish//;ana?«  k;Ytva ;  Burnouf  has 
'en  commen9ant  par  le  B.M.  S.' 


37^  SADDIIARMA-PUJVDARIKA.  XXII. 

sattvapriyadar^ana  applied  himself  to  his  difficult 
course.  He  wandered  twelve  thousand  years  strenu- 
ously engaged  in  contemplation.  After  the  expira- 
tion of  those  twelve  thousand  years  he  acquired  the 
Samadhi  termed  Sarvarupasandariana  (i.  e.  the  sight 
or  display  of  all  forms).  No  sooner  had  he  acquired 
that  Samadhi  than  satisfied,  glad,  joyful,  rejoicing, 
and  delio;hted  he  made  the  followinor  reflection  :  It  is 
owing  to  this  Dharmaparyaya  of  the  Lotus  of  the 
True  Law  that  I  have  acquired  the  Samadhi  of 
Sarvar^pasandar^ana.  Then  he  made  another  reflec- 
tion :  Let  me  do  homage  to  the  Lord  A"andravimala- 
suryaprabhasa^ri  and  this  Dharmaparyaya  of  the 
Lotus  of  the  True  Law.  No  sooner  had  he  entered 
upon  such  a  meditation  than  a  great  rain  of  Man- 
darava  and   orreat  Mandarava  flowers  fell  from  the 

o 

upper  sky.  A  cloud  of  Kalanusarin  sandal  was 
formed,  and  a  rain  of  Uragasara  sandal  poured 
down.  And  the  nature  of  those  essences  was  so 
noble  that  one  karsha  of  it  was  worth  the  whole 
Saha-world. 

After  a  while,  Nakshatrara^asahkusumitabhi^?Ia, 
the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Sarvasattvapriyadar-^ana 
rose  from  that  meditation  with  memory  and  full  con- 
sciousness, and  reflected  thus  :  This  display  of  magic 
power  is  not  likely  to  honour  the  Lord  and  Tathagata 
so  much  as  the  sacrifice  of  my  own  body  will  do^. 
Then  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Sarvasattvapriya- 
dari-ana  instantly  began  to  eat  Agallochum,  Olibanum, 
and  the  resin  of  Boswellia  Thurifera,  and  to  drink  oil 
of  A'ampaka^.   So,  Nakshatrara^asankusumitabhi^;^a, 

'  In  the  story  of  Sarvasattvapriyadarjana  it  is  easy  to  recognise 
a  Buddhist  version  of  the  myth  of  the  Phoenix. 

^  In  the  Old  English  poem  of  the  Phoenix,  verse  192,  we  read  that 


XXII.      ANCIENT  DEVOTION  OF  BHAISHAGYARAGA.        379 

the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Sarvasattvapriyadari-ana 
passed  twelve  years  in  always  and  constantly  eating 
those  fragrant  substances  and  drinking  oil  of  A'am- 
paka.  After  the  expiration  of  those  twelve  years 
the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Sarvasattvapriyadar^ana 
wrapped  his  body  in  divine  garments,  bathed  ^  it  in 
oil,  made  his  (last)  vow,  and  thereafter  burnt  his 
own  body  with  the  object  to  pay  worship  to  the 
Tathagata  and  this  Dharmaparyaya  of  the  Lotus  of 
the  True  Law.  Then,  Nakshatrara^asankusumita- 
bhi^;^a,  eighty  worlds^  equal  to  the  sands  of  the  river 
Ganges  were  brightened  by  the  glare  of  the  flames 
from  the  blazing  body  of  the  Bodhisattva  Mahisat- 
tva  Sarvasattvapriyadari-ana,  and  the  eighty^  Lords 
Buddhas*  equal  to  the  sands  of  the  Ganges  in  those 
worlds  all  shouted  their  applause,  {and  exclaimed)  : 
Well  done,  well  done,  young  man  of  good  family, 
that  is  the  real  heroism  which  the  Boddhisattvas 
Mahasattvas  should  develop  ;  that  is  the  real  worship 
of  the  Tathagata,  the  real  worship  of  the  law.  No 
worshipping  with  flowers,  incense,  fragrant  wreaths, 
ointment,  powder,  cloth,  umbrellas,  flags,  banners ; 
no  worshipping  with  material  gifts  or  with  Uragasara 
sandal  equals  it.     This,  young  man  of  good  family, 

the  noble  bird  collects  the  sweetest  herbs,  blossoms,  and  perfumes ; 
similarly  verse  652.     He  feeds  upon  mildew,  verse  260. 

'  The  Phoenix  bathes  twelve  times  in  the  well  before  the  sun's 
arrival,  and  as  many  times  sips  the  cool  water, 

^  According  to  the  reading  of  the  Camb.  MS.,  ajitir  Gahga"; 
Burnouf  has  '  sables  de  80  Ganges,'  which  seems  preferable. 

°  Here  the  same  remark  as  in  the  preceding  note. 

*  In  the  Old  English  poem,  verse  355  seq.,  we  read  that  hosts 
of  birds  flock  together  from  all  points  of  space  '  to  celebrate  in 
song  the  hero  and  saint.'  Further  on,  verse  590,  the  birds  are 
identified  with  the  released  souls  accompanying  Christ. 


3§0  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  XXII. 


is  the  sublimest  gift,  higher  than  the  abandoning  of 
royalty,  the  abandoning  of  beloved  children  and 
wife.  Sacrificing  one's  own  body,  young  man  of 
good  family,  is  the  most  distinguished,  the  chiefest, 
the  best,  the  very  best,  the  most  sublime  worship 
of  the  law.  After  pronouncing  this  speech,  Naksha- 
trarafasankusumitabhi^;^a,  those  Lords  Buddhas 
were  silent. 

The  body  of  Sarvasattvapriyadari-ana  continued 
blazing  for  twelve  thousand  years  without  ceasing 
to  burn.  After  the  expiration  of  those  twelve 
thousand  years  the  fire  was  extinguished.  Then, 
Nakshatrara^asaiikusumitabhi^/^a,  the  Bodhisattva 
Mahasattva  Sarvasattvapriyadari'ana,  having  paid 
such  worship  to  the  Tathagata,  disappeared  from 
that  place,  and  (re)appeared  under  the  (spiritual) 
reign  of  that  very  Lord  A'andravimalasuryapra- 
bhasai-ri,  the  Tathagata,  &c.,  in  the  house  of  king 
Vimaladatta,  by  apparitional  birth,  and  sitting  cross- 
legged.  Immediately  after  his  appearance  the 
Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Sarvasattvapriyadar^ana 
addressed  his  father  and  mother  in  the  followine 
stanza : 

I.  This,  O  exalted  king,  is  the  walk  in  which 
I  have  acquired  meditation ;  I  have  achieved  a 
heroical  feat,  fulfilled  a  great  vote  by  sacrificing 
my  own  dear  body. 

After  uttering  this  stanza,  Nakshatrara^asaiiku- 
sumitabhif/Ia,  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Sarva- 
sattvapriyadarj-ana  said  to  his  father  and  mother : 
Even  now,  father  and  mother,  the  Lord  A'andra- 
vimalasuryaprabhasam,  the  Tathagata,  &c.,  is  still 
living,  existing,  staying  in  the  world,  the  Lord  by 
worshipping  whom    I    have    obtained   the    spell    of 


XXII.        ANCIENT  DEVOTION  OF  BHAISHAGYARAGA.       38 1 


knowing  all  sounds^  and  this  Dharmaparyaya  of  the 
Lotus  of  the  True  Law,  consisting  of  eighty  hun- 
dred thousand  myriads  of  /^otis  of  stanzas,  of  a 
hundred  Niyutas^  of  Vivaras^  of  a  hundred  Vivaras, 
which  I  have  heard  from  that  Lord.  Therefore, 
father  and  mother,  I  should  like  to  go  to  that  Lord 
and  worship  him  again.  Instantaneously,  Naksha- 
trara^-asankusumitabhi^/7a,  the  Bodhisattva  Mahi- 
sattva  Sarvasattvapriyadar^ana  rose  seven  talas* 
high  into  the  sky  and  sat  cross-legged  on  the  top  of 
a  tower  of  seven  precious  substances.  So  he  went  up 
to  the  presence  of  that  Lord,  and  having  approached 
him  humbly  saluted  him,  circumambulated  him  seven 
times  from  left  to  right,  stretched  the  joined  hands 
towards  the  Lord,  and  after  thus  paying  his  homage 
addressed  him  with  the  following  stanza  : 

2.  O  thou  whose  face  is  so  spotless  and  bright ; 
thou,  king  and  sage!  How  thy  lustre  sparkles 
in  all  quarters!  After  having  anciently  paid  thee 
homage,  O  Sugata,  I  now  come  again  to  behold 
thee,  O   Lord. 

Having  pronounced  this  stanza,  the  Bodhisattva 
Mahasattva    Sarvasattvapriyadar^ana    said    to    the 


^  This  comes  rather  unexpected ;  of  the  Phoenix  in  the  Old 
English  poem,  verse  131,  we  read  that  'the  sound  of  the  bird's 
sons:  is  sweeter  and  more  beautiful  than  all  other  singer-craft, 
and  more  delicious  than  any  other  tune.' 

2  Equal  to  a  thousand  billions.  The  cyphers  being  noughts, 
the  whole  number  =1.  Eighty  is  the  number  of  intermediate 
kalpas  in  one  Mahakalpa  or  Great  JEon,  i.  e.  one  day  and  night. 
The  turn  (paryaya)  of  the  True  Law  is  the  regular  revolution  of 
the  sun. 

3  Equal  to  a  hundred  thousand  billions.  As  cyphers  must  be 
left  out  of  account,  all  the  numbers  specified  come  to  one. 

*  The  height  of  a  palm-tree,  or  a  span. 


382  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  XXII. 

Lord  A'andravimalastaryaprabhasairi,  the  Tathagata, 
&c.  :  Thou  art  then  still  aUve,  Lord  ?  Whereon  the 
Lord  A'andravimalasiiryaprabhasa^rt,  the  Tathagata, 
&c.,  replied  :  The  time  of  my  final  extinction,  young 
man  of  good  family,  has  arrived ;  the  time  of  my 
death  has  arrived.  Therefore,  young  man  of  good 
family,  prepare  my  couch  ;  I  am  going  to  enter  com- 
plete extinction.  Then,  Nakshatrara^asahkusumi- 
tabhi^;'^a,  the  Lord  A'andravimalasuryaprabhasa^ri 
said  to  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Sarvasattva- 
priyadar^ana :  I  entrust  to  thee,  young  man  of  good 
family,  my  commandment  (or  mastership,  rule) ;  I 
entrust  to  thee  these  Bodhisattvas  Mahasattvas, 
these  great  disciples,  this  Buddha-enlightenment,  this 
world,  these  jewel  cars,  these  jewel  trees,  and  these 
angels,  my  servitors.  I  entrust  to  thee  also,  young 
man  of  good  family,  my  relics  after  my  complete 
extinction.  Thou  shouldst  pay  a  great  worship  to 
my  relics,  young  man  of  good  family,  and  also  dis- 
tribute them  and  build  many  thousands  of  Stupas. 
And,  Nakshatrarafasankusumitabhi^;ia,  after  the 
Lord  A'andravimalasuryaprabhasai'ri,  the  Tathagata, 
&c.,  had  given  these  instructions  to  the  Bodhisattva 
Mahasattva  Sarvasattvapriyadar^-ana  he  in  the  last 
watch  of  the  night  entered  absolute  final  extinction  ^ 

Thereupon,  Nakshatrara^asahkusumitabhi^/Ia,  the 
Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Sarvasattvapriyadar^ana, 
perceiving  that  the  Lord  A'andravimalasuryapra- 
bhasam,  the  Tathagata,  &c.,  had  expired,  made 
a  pyre   of  Uragasara   sandal-wood  and    burnt  the 


^  It  is  sufficiently  clear  that  the  Nirvana  of  this  Tathagata  is 
the  end  of  a  day  of  twenty-four  hours,  and  that  Sarvasattvapriya- 
darjana  is  the  new  day. 


XXTT,        ANCIENT  DEVOTION  OF  BHAISHAGYARAGA.       383 

body  of  the  Tathagata.  When  he  saw  that  the 
body  was  burnt  to  ashes  and  the  fire  extinct,  he 
took  the  bones  ^  and  wept,  cried  and  lamented. 
After  having  wept,  cried  and  lamented,  Nakshatra- 
ra^asankusumitabhi^77a,  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva 
Sarvasattvapriyadari^ana  caused  to  be  made  eighty- 
four  thousand  urns  of  seven  precious  substances, 
deposed  in  them  the  bones  of  the  Tathagata,  founded 
eighty-four  thousand  Stupas  ^,  reaching  in  height  to 
the  Brahma-world,  adorned  with  a  row  of  umbrellas, 
and  equipped  with  silk  bands  and  bells.  After 
founding  those  Stupas  he  made  the  following  re- 
flection :  I  have  paid  honour  to  the  Tathagata-relics 
of  the  Lord  A'andravimalasiiryaprabhasairi,  but  I 
will  pay  to  those  relics  a  yet  loftier  and  most  dis- 
tinguished honour.  Then,  Nakshatrara^^'asaiikusu- 
mitabhi^;1a,  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Sarva- 
sattvapriyadari'ana  addressed  that  entire  assembly 
of  Bodhisattvas,  those  great  disciples,  those  gods, 
Nagas,  goblins,  Gandharvas,  demons,  Garu</as, 
Kinnaras,  great  serpents,  men,  and  beings  not 
human  :  Ye  all,  young  men  of  good  family,  unani- 


^  In  the  Phoenix  myth  it  is  the  bird  himself  that,  after  his 
resurrection,  collects  the  relics;  verses  269-272.  Both  versions 
come  to  the  same,  for  the  sun  of  to-day  is  essentially  the  same 
as  yesterday's. 

^  Exactly  the  same  number  of  monasteries  was  erected  by  Ajoka, 
according  to  the  Dipava/wsa  VI,  96.  The  king  was  induced  to 
build  so  many  monasteries  because  there  were  eighty-four  or, 
optionally,  eighty-four  thousand  towns  in  India,  a  number  precisely 
coinciding  with  that  of  the  sections  of  the  Law.  Notwithstanding 
the  difference  in  details,  it  may  be  assumed  that  there  is  some 
connection  between  the  two  tales,  especially  because  A^oka  was 
a  namesake  of  Sarvasattvapriyadarjana,  one  of  his  epithets  being 
Priyadarjana. 


384  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARiKA.  XXII. 

mously  vow  to  pay  worship  to  the  rehcs  of  the 
Lord.  Immediately  after,  Nakshatrarafasaiikusu- 
mitabhi^;^a,  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Sarva- 
sattvapriyadari^ana,  in  presence  of  those  eighty-four 
thousand  StClpas,  burnt  his  own  arm  which  was 
marked  by  the  one  hundred  auspicious  signs,  and 
so  paid  worship  to  those  Stupas  containing  the 
rehcs  of  the  Tathagata,  during  seventy-two  thousand 
years.  And  while  paying  worship,  he  educated 
countless  hundred  thousands  of  myriads  of  ko^'is  of 
disciples  from  that  assembly,  in  consequence  whereof 
all  those  Bodhisattvas  acquired  the  Samadhi  termed 
Sarvartjpasandari'ana. 

Then,  Nakshatrara^asankusumitabhi^/^a,the  entire 
assembly  of  Bodhisattvas  and  all  great  disciples, 
seeing  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Sarvasattvapri- 
yadarj'ana  deprived  of  a  limb,  said,  with  tears  in 
their  eyes,  weeping,  crying,  lamenting :  The  Bodhi- 
sattva Mahasattva  Sarvasattvapriyadar^ana,  our 
master  and  instructor,  is  now  deprived  of  a  limb, 
deprived  of  one  arm.  But  the  Bodhisattva  Maha- 
sattva Sarvasattvapriyadari"ana  addressed  those 
Bodhisattvas,  great  disciples,  and  angels  in  the  fol- 
lowing terms  :  Do  not,  young  men  of  good  family, 
weep,  cry,  lament  at  the  sight  of  my  being  deprived 
of  one  arm.  All  the  Lords  Buddhas  who  be,  exist, 
live  in  the  endless,  limitless  worlds  in  every  direction 
of  space,  have  I  taken  to  witness.  Before  their  face 
have  I  pronounced  a  vow  of  truth,  and  by  that 
truth,  by  that  word  of  truth  shall  I,  after  the 
sacrifice  of  my  own  arm  in  honour  of  the  Tathagata, 
have  a  body  of  gold  colour.  By  this  truth,  by  this 
word  of  truth  let  this  arm  of  mine  become  such  as 
it  was  before,  and  let  the  great  earth  shake  in  six 


XXII.      ANCIENT    DEVOTION    OF    BHAISHAGYARAGA.      385 


different  ways,  and  let  the  angels  in  the  sky  pour 
down  a  rain  of  flowers.  No  sooner,  Nakshatrara^a- 
sankusumitabhi^;'/a,  had  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva 
Sarvasattvapriyadar^ana  made  that  vow  of  truth, 
than  the  whole  triple  macrocosm  was  shaken  in 
six  different  ways,  and  from  the  sky  aloft  fell  a 
great  rain  of  flowers.  The  arm  of  the  Bodhisattva 
Mahasattva  Sarvasattvapriyadar^ana  became  again 
as  it  was  before,  and  that  by  the  power  of  knowledge 
and  by  the  power  of  pious  merit  belonging  to  that 
Bodhisattva  Mahasattva.  Perhaps,  Nakshatrara^a- 
sankusumitabhi^/ea,  thou  wilt  have  some  doubt, 
uncertainty  or  misgiving,  (and  think)  that  the  Bodhi- 
sattva Mahasattva  Sarvasattvapriyadari-ana  at  that 
time,  and  that  epoch,  was  another.  But  do  not  think 
so  ;  for  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Bhaisha^ara^a 
here  was  at  that  time,  and  that  epoch,  the  Bodhisat- 
tva Mahasattva  Sarvasattvapriyadar^-ana.  So  many 
hundred  thousand  myriads  of  ko/is  of  difficult  things, 
Nakshatrara^asahkusumitabhi^^a,  and  sacrifices  ^  of 
his  body  does  this  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Sarva- 
sattvapriyadar^ana  accomplish.  Now,  Nakshatra- 
ra^asahkusumitabhi^;^a,  the  young  man  or  young 
lady  of  good  family  striving  in  the  Bodhisattva 
vehicle  towards  the  goal  and  longing  for  supreme, 
perfect  enlightenment,  who  at  the  Tathagata-shrines 
shall  burn  a  great  toe,  a  finger,  a  toe,  or  a  whole 
limb,  such  a  young  man  or  young  lady  of  good 
family,  I  assure  thee,  shall  produce  far  more  ^  pious 
merit,  far  more  than  results  from  giving  up  a  king- 

^  Atmabhavaparityaga/«J  -^a.  The  Phoenix  in  the  poem, 
verse  364  seq.,  repeatedly,  every  thousand  years,  dies  in  the  flames 
to  arise  anew  from  his  ashes,  and  to  be  reborn. 

^  Bahutaraw  khalv  api. 

[21]  C  C 


86  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARtKA.  XXIT. 


dom,  sons,  daughters,  and  wives,  the  whole  triple 
world  with  its  woods,  oceans,  mountains,  springs, 
streams,  tanks,  wells,  and  gardens.  And,  Naksha- 
trara^asankusumitabhi^//a,  the  young  man  or  young 
lady  of  good  family,  striving  in  the  Bodhisattva- 
vehicle  for  the  goal,  who  after  filling  with  the  seven 
precious  substances  this  whole  triple  world  should 
give  it  in  alms  to  all  Buddhas,  Bodhisattvas,  dis- 
ciples, Pratyekabuddhas,  that  young  man  or  young 
lady  of  good  family,  Nakshatrarafasaiikusumita- 
bhi^;^a,  does  not  produce  so  much  pious  merit  as 
a  young  man  or  young  lady  of  good  family  who 
shall  keep,  were  it  but  a  single  verse  from  this 
Dharmaparyaya  of  the  Lotus  of  the  True  Law.  I 
positively  declare  that  the  accumulation  of  merit  of 
the  latter  is  greater  than  if  a  person,  after  filling 
the  whole  triple  world  with  the  seven  precious 
substances,  bestows  it  in  alms  on  all  Buddhas, 
Bodhisattvas,  disciples,  or  Pratyekabuddhas. 

Just  as  the  great  ocean,  Nakshatrara^asankusu- 
mitabhi^;7a,  surpasses  all  springs,  streams,  and  tanks, 
so,  Nakshatrarafasankusumitabhi^;}a,  this  Dharma- 
paryaya of  the  Lotus  of  the  True  Law  surpasses  all 
Sutras  spoken  by  the  Tathagata^  Just  as  the 
Sumeru,  the  king  of  mountains,  Nakshatrara^a- 
sahkusumitabhi^/la,  all  elevations  at  the  cardinal 
points  ^   horizon    circles    and    great   horizons  ^,    so, 

^  Or,  the  Tathagatas.  The  same  alternative  in  the  sequel.  All 
Siitras  in  the  world  have  their  source  in  the  Tathagata,  of  course  ; 
just  as  all  Vedas,  Itihasas,  &c.  are  the  breathing  out,  the  uttering  of 
the  sentient  principle,  the  a  t  m a  n  ;  ^atapatha-Brahmawa  XIV,  5,  4,  i o. 

^  Kalaparvata,  literally,  'time  mountain,'  because  the  points  of 
rising  and  setting  are  called  parvata,  giri,  &c.,  mountain  in  Sanskrit. 

'  The  whole  horizon  is  also  an  apparent  elevation  and  there- 
fore likewise  called  parvata,  &c. 


XXII.      ANCIENT    DEVOTION    OF    BHAISHAGYARAGA.      387 

Nakshatrar^crasahkusumitabhi^;^a,  this  Dharmapar- 
yaya  of  the  Lotus  of  the  True  Law  surpasses  as  a 
king  all  the  Stjtrantas  spoken  by  the  Tathagata. 
As  the  moon,  Nakshatrara^asahkusumitabhi^/^a,  as 
a  luminary,  takes  the  first  rank  amongst  the  whole 
of  the  asterisms,  so,  Nakshatrara^asankusumita- 
bhi^;/a,  this  Dharmaparyaya  of  the  Lotus  of  the 
True  Law  ranks  first  amongst  all  Sutrantas  spoken 
by  the  Tathagata,  though  it  surpasses  hundred 
thousands  of  myriads  of  ko/'is  of  moons.  As  the 
orb  of  the  sun,  Nakshatrara^asankusumitabhi^;^a, 
dispels  gloomy  darkness,  so,  Nakshatrara^asaiikusu- 
mitabhi^;7a,  this  Dharmapayaya  of  the  Lotus  of  the 
True  Law  dispels  all  the  gloomy  darkness  of  unholy 
works.  As  Indra,  Nakshatrara^asankusumitabhif;1a, 
is  the  chief  of  the  gods  of  paradise,  so,  Nakshatra- 
ra^asahkusumitabhi^T^a,  this  Dharmaparyaya  of  the 
Lotus  of  the  True  Law  is  the  chief  of  Statrantas  spoken 
by  the  Tathagata.  As  Brahma  Sahampati,  Naksha- 
trara^asankusumitabhi^;}a,  is  the  king  of  all  Brahma- 
kayika  gods  and  exercises  the  function  of  a  father 
in  the  Brahma  world,  so,  Nakshatrara^asaiikusu- 
mitabhi^;1a,  this  Dharmaparyaya  of  the  Lotus  of 
the  True  Law  exercises  the  function  of  a  father  to 
all  beings,  whether  under  training  or  past  it,  to  all 
disciples,  Pratyekabuddhas,  and  those  who  in  the 
Bodhisattva-vehicle  are  striving  for  the  goal.  As 
the  Srotaapanna,  Nakshatrara^asaiikusumitabhi^^/a, 
as  well  as  the  Sakr/dagamin,  Anagamin,  Arhat  \  and 
Pratyekabuddha,  excels  the  ignorant  people  and  the 
profanum  vulgus,  so,  Nakshatrarac'asankusumlta- 

^  Terms  denoting  the  four  degrees  of  sanctification,  answering  to 
the  Prathamakalpika,  Madhubhumika,  Pra^ii^yotis,  and  Atikranta- 
bhavaniya  in  the  Yoga  system  ;  Yoga^astra  III,  50,  commentary. 

C  C  2 


388  SADDHARMA-PUiVJDARiKA.  XXII. 

hhi£-n2i,  the  Dharmaparyaya  of  the  Lotus  of  the  True 
Law  must  be  held  to  excel  and  surpass  all  Sutrantas 
spoken  by  the  Tathagata ;  and  such  as  shall  keep 
this  king  of  Statras,  Nakshatrara^asaiikusumitabhi- 
£'U3.,  must  be  held  to  surpass  others  (who  do  not). 
As  a  Bodhisattva  is  accounted  superior  to  all 
disciples  and  Pratyekabuddhas,  so,  Nakshatrara^^a- 
sankusumitabhi^/'Ia,  this  Dharmaparyaya  of  the 
Lotus  of  the  True  Law  is  accounted  superior  to  all 
Sutrantas  spoken  by  the  Tathagata.  Even  as  the 
Tathaeata  is  the  crowned  kin^  of  the  law  ^  of  all 
disciples,  Pratyekabuddhas,  and  Bodhisattvas,  so, 
Nakshatrarac^asankusumitabhi^/la,  this  Dharmapar- 
yaya is  a  Tathagata  in  respect  to  those  who  in  the 
vehicle  of  Bodhisattvas  are  striving  to  reach 
the  goal.  This  Dharmaparyaya  of  the  Lotus  of  the 
True  Law,  Nakshatrara^asarikusumitabhi^^/2a,  saves 
all  beings  from  all  fear,  delivers  them  from  all 
pains.  It  is  like  a  tank  for  the  thirsty,  like  a  fire 
for  those  who  suffer  from  cold,  like  a  garment  for 
the  naked,  like  the  caravan  leader  for  the  merchants, 
like  a  mother  for  her  children,  like  a  boat  for  those 
who  ferry  over,  like  a  leech  for  the  sick,  like  a  lamp 
for  those  who  are  wrapt  in  darkness,  like  a  jewel  fof 
those  who  want  wealth,  like  the  ocean  for  the  rivers, 
like  a  torch  for  the  dispelling  of  darkness.  So, 
Nakshatrara^asahkusumitabhi^/^a,  this  Dharmapar- 
yaya of  the  Lotus  of  the  True  Law  delivers  from  all 
evils,  extirpates  all  diseases,  releases  from  the  narrow 
bonds  of  the  mundane  whirl  ^.  And  he  who  shall 
hear  this  Dharmaparyaya  of  the  Lotus  of  the  True 

^  Dharmar%a/^  pa//abaddha^,  i.  e.  properly  the  legitimate 
crowned  king. 
*  In  other  words,  this  Dharmaparyaya  is  Death  or  Nirva«a. 


XXII.      ANCIENT    DEVOTION    OF    BHAISHAGYARAGA.      389 


Law,  who  shall  write  it  and  cause  it  to  be  written, 
will  produce  an  accumulation  of  pious  merit  the 
term  of  which  is  not  to  be  arrived  at  even  by 
Buddha-knowledge ;  so  great  is  the  accumulation  of 
pious  merit  that  will  be  produced  by  a  young  man 
of  good  family  or  a  young  lady  who  after  teaching 
or  learning  it,  writing  it  or  having  it  collected  into 
a  volume,  shall  honour,  respect,  venerate,  worship 
it  with  flowers,  incense,  fragrant  garlands,  ointment, 
powder, umbrellas, flags,  banners,  triumphal  streamers, 
with  music,  with  joining  of  hands,  with  lamps  burning 
with  ghee,  scented  oil,  A'ampaka  oil,  jasmine  oil, 
trumpet-flower  oil,Varshika  oil  or  double  jasmine  oil. 
Great  will  be  the  pious  merit,  Nakshatraraj-a- 
sankusumitabhi^;1a,  to  be  produced  by  a  young  man 
of  good  family  or  a  young  lady  striving  to  reach  the 
goal  in  the  Bodhlsattva-vehicle,  who  shall  keep  this 
chapter  of  the  Ancient  Devotion  of  Bhalshafyara^a, 
who  shall  read  and  learn  it.  And,  Nakshatrara^a, 
should  a  female,  after  hearing  this  Dharmaparyaya, 
grasp  and  keep  it,  then  this  existence  will  be  her 
last  existence  as  a  woman.  Any  female,  Nakshatra- 
rafasarikusumltabhl^;7a,  who  In  the  last  five  hundred 
years  of  the  millennium  shall  hear  and  penetrate 
this  chapter  of  the  Ancient  Devotion  of  Bhalsha- 
^yara^a,  will  after  disappearing  from  earth  be 
(re)born  in  the  world  Sukhavati,  where  the  Lord 
Amitayus  \  the  Tathagata,  &c.,  dwells,  exists,  lives 
surrounded  by  a  host  of  Bodhlsattvas.  There  will 
he  (who  formerly  was  a  female)  appear  seated  on 
a  throne  consisting  of  the  interior  of  a  lotus ; 
no  affection,  no  hatred,  no  infatuation,  no  pride,  no 


Another  name  of  Amitabha. 


390  SADDHARMA-PUiVJDARIKA.  XXII. 

envy,  no  wrath,  no  malignity  will  vex  him.  With 
his  birth  he  will  also  receive  the  five  transcendent 
faculties,  as  well  as  the  acquiescence  in  the  eternal 
law,  and,  once  in  possession  thereof,  Nakshatrara^a- 
sankusumitabhi^/Ia,  he  as  a  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva 
will  see  Tathagatas  equal  to  the  sands  of  seventy- 
two  rivers  Ganges  \  So  perfect  will  be  his  organ 
of  sight  that  by  means  thereof  he  shall  see  those 
Lords  Buddhas,  which  Lords  Buddhas  will  applaud 
him  (and  say)  :  Well  done,  well  done,  young  man 
of  good  family,  that  after  hearing  this  Dharma- 
paryaya  of  the  Lotus  of  the  True  Law  which  has 
been  promulgated  by  the  spiritual  proclamation  of 
the  Lord  .S'akyamuni,  the  Tathagata,  &c.,  thou  hast 
studied,  meditated,  examined,  minded  it,  and  ex- 
pounded it  to  other  beings,  other  persons.  This 
accumulation  of  thy  pious  merit,  young  man  of  good 
family,  cannot  be  burnt  by  fire,  nor  swept  away  by 
water.  Even  a  thousand  Buddhas  would  not  be 
able  to  determine  this  accumulation  of  thy  pious 
merit,  young  man  of  good  family.  Thou  hast  sub- 
dued the  opposition  of  the  Evil  One,  young  man  of 
good  family.  Thou,  young  man  of  good  family,  hast 
victoriously  emerged  ^  from  the  battle  of  mundane 
existence,  hast  crushed  the  enemies  annoying  thee^. 
Thou,  young  man  of  good  family,  hast  been  superin- 
tended by  thousands  of  Buddhas  ;  thine  equal,  young 
man  of  good  family,  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  world, 
including  the  gods  ^,  with  the  only  exception  of  the 

^  Or,  to  seventy-two  times  the  sands  of  the  river  Ganges. 
^  Uttirwabhavasafigrama. 

^  Marditajatruka«/-^aka  (sic;  cf.  Pali  kawMaka). 
*  In  the  margin  are  added  the  words,  also  found  in  Burnouf  s 
translation,  '  including  Maras,  Brahmans,  and  ascetics.' 


XXII.       ANCIENT    DEVOTION    OF    BHAISHAGYARAGA.      39 1 

Tathagata ;  there  is  no  other,  be  he  disciple, 
Pratyekabuddha,  or  Bodhisattva,  able  to  surpass 
thee  in  pious  merit,  knowledge,  wisdom  or  medita- 
tion. Such  a  power  of  knowledge,  Nakshatrara- 
^asahkusumitabhi^'/la,  will  be  acquired  by  that 
Bodhisattva. 

Any  one,  Nakshatrara^asankusumitabhi^;^a,  who 
on  hearing  this  chapter  of  the  ancient  devotion  of 
Bhaisha^yara^a  approves  it,  will  emit  from  his 
mouth  a  breath  sweet  as  of  the  lotus,  and  from  his 
limbs  a  fragrance  as  of  sandal-wood.  Such  temporal 
advantages  as  I  have  just  now  indicated  will  belong 
to  him  who  approves  this  Dharmaparyaya.  On  that 
account  then,  Nakshatrarac^asahkusumitabhi^?/a,  I 
transmit  to  thee  this  chapter  of  the  Ancient  Devotion 
of  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Sarvasattvapriya- 
darj-ana,  that  at  the  end  of  time,  the  last  period,  in 
the  latter  half  of  the  millennium  it  may  have  course 
here  in  (7ambudvipa  and  not  be  lost ;  that  neither 
Mara  the  Fiend,  nor  the  celestial  beings  called  Mara- 
kayikas,  Nagas,  goblins,  imps  may  find  the  oppor- 
tunity of  hurting  it.  Therefore,  Nakshatrara^asan- 
kusumitabhi^?1a,  I  bequeath  this  Dharmaparyaya ; 
it  is  to  be  like  a  medicament  for  sick  and  suffering 
creatures  in  6^ambudvipa.  No  sickness  shall  over- 
power him  who  has  heard  this  Dharmaparyaya,  no 
decrepitude,  no  untimely  death.  Whenever  a  person 
striving  to  reach  the  goal  in  the  vehicle  of  Bodhi- 
sattvas  happens  to  see  such  a  monk  as  keeps  this 
Sutranta,  then  he  should  strew  him  with  sandal- 
powder  and  blue  lotuses,  and  reflect  thus :  This 
young  man  of  good  family  is  going  to  reach  the 
terrace  of  enlightenment ;  he  will  spread  the  bundle 


A, 


392  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  XXII. 

of  grass  ^  on  the  terrace  of  enlightenment ;  he  will 
put  to  flight  the  party  of  Mara,  blow  the  conch 
trumpet  of  the  law,  beat  the  drum  of  the  law,  cross 
the  ocean  of  existence.  Thus,  Nakshatrara^asan- 
kusumitabhl^;2a,  should  a  young  man  of  good  family, 
striving  to  reach  the  goal  In  the  vehicle  of  Bodhi- 
sattva,  reflect  when  seeing  a  monk  who  keeps  this 
Sutra,  and  he  will  acquire  such  advantages  as  have 
been  indicated  by  the  Tathagata. 

While  this  chapter  of  the  Ancient  Devotion  of 
Bhaisha^'ara^^a  was  being  expounded,  eighty-four 
thousand  Bodhlsattvas  attained  the  spell  connected 
with  skill  In  all  sounds.  And  the  Lord  Prabhuta- 
ratna,  the  Tathagata,  &c.,  intimated  his  approval 
(by  saying) :  Well  done,  well  done,  Nakshatrara^a- 
sankusumitabhi^;/a ;  thou  hast  done  well  In  thus 
questioning  the  Tathagata,  who  is  endowed  with 
such  inconceivable  qualities  and  properties. 


^  This  is  an  allusion  to  the  bundles  of  grass  the  Bodhisattva 
received  from  Svastika,  the  grass-cutter,  when  he  was  on  his  way 
to  occupy  his  seat  at  the  foot  of  the  Bo  tree ;  see  Lalita-vistara, 
P-  357  j  <7ataka  I,  p.  70  (English  translation  by  Professor  Rhys 
Davids,  p.  95). 


XXTII.  GADGADASVARA.  393 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 

GADGADASVARA. 

At  that  moment  the  Lord  ^'akyamuni,  the  Tatha- 
gata,  &c.,  darted  a  flash  of  light  from  the  circle  of 
hair  between  his  eyebrows,  one  of  the  characteristic 
signs  of  a  great  man,  by  which  flash  of  light  hundred 
thousands  of  myriads  of  ko/is  of  Buddha-fields, 
equal  to  the  sands  of  eighteen  rivers  Ganges,  became 
illuminated.  Beyond  those  Buddha-fields,  equal,  &c., 
is  the  world  called  Vairo/^anara^-mipratima/^^ita  (i.e. 
embellished  by  the  rays  of  the  sun).  There  dwells, 
lives,  exists  the  Tathagata  named  Kamaladala- 
vimalanakshatrara^asahkusumitabhi^;^a,  who,  sur- 
rounded and  attended  by  a  large  and  immense 
assembly  of  Bodhisattvas,  preached  the  law.  Imme- 
diately the  ray  of  light  flashing  from  the  circle  of 
hair  between  the  eyebrows  of  the  Lord  KSakyamuni, 
the  Tathagata,  &:c.,  filled  the  world  Vairo/'anara- 
.ymipratima^^rt'ita  with  a  great  lustre.  In  that  world 
Vairo/='anarai-mipratima;^rf'ita  there  was  a  Bodhisattva 
Mahasattva  called  Gadgadasvara,  who  had  planted 
roots  of  goodness,  who  had  before  seen  similar  lumi- 
nous flashes  emitted  by  many  Tathagatas,  &c.,  and 
who  had  acquired  many  Samadhis,  such  as  the  Sa- 
madhi  Dhva^agrakeyura  (i.  e.  bracelet  at  the  upper 
end  of  the  banner  staff),  Saddharma-pu;/^arika  (i.e. 
the  Lotus  of  the  True  Law),  Vimaladatta  (i.e.  given 
by  Vimala),  Nakshatrara^avikri^ita  (i.e.  sport  of  the 


A 


394  SADDHARMA-PUiVZ)ARlKA.  XXIIT. 


king  of  asterisms,  the  moon  god),  Anilambha^ 
G^;'2anamiidra  (i.e.  the  seal  of  science),  A'andrapra- 
dipa  (i.e.  moon-Hght  2),  Sarvarutakaiualya  (i.e.  skill 
in  all  sounds),  Sarvapu;^yasamu/'/^aya  (i.e.  compen- 
dium or  collection  of  all  piety),  Prasadavati  (i.e.  the 
favourably-disposed  lady),  RiddhWikridltSL  (i.e.  sport 
of  magic),  Gusmolka.  (i.e.  torch  of  knowledge),  Vyu- 
hara^a  (i.e.  king  of  expansions  or  speculations), 
Vimalaprabha  (i.e.  spotless  lustre),  Vimalagarbha 
(i.e.  of  spotless  interior  part),  Apkr/tsna^  Surya- 
varta  (i.  e.  sun-turn) ;  in  short,  he  had  acquired  many 
hundred  thousand  myriads  of  ko/is  of  Samadhis  equal 
to  the  sands  of  the  river  Ganges.  Now,  the  flash  of 
light  came  down  upon  that  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva 
Gadgadasvara.  Then  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva 
Gadgadasvara  rose  from  his  seat,  put  his  upper  robe 
upon  one  shoulder,  fixed  his  right  knee  on  the 
ground,  stretched  his  joined  hands  towards  the  Lord 
Buddha,  and  said  to  the  Tathagata  Kamaladalavi- 
malanakshatrarafasahkusumitabhi^;Ia :  O  Lord,  I 
would  resort  to  the  Saha-world  to  see,  salute,  wait 
upon  the  Lord  ^'akyamuni,  the  Tathagata,  &c.  ;  to 
see  and  salute  Ma%iurt,  the  prince  royal ;  to  see  the 
Bodhisattvas  Bhaisha^yara^a,  Pradana^ura,  Naksha- 
trara^asahkusumitabhi^/^a,Vi5ish/a/('aritra,Vyuhara^a, 
Bhaisha^^ara^asamudgata. 

Then  the  Lord  Kamaladalavimalanakshatrara^a- 
sankusumitabhif;1a,  the  Tathagata,  &c.,  said  to  the 
Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Gadoradasvara  :  On  comine 
to  the  Saha-world,  young  man  of  good  family,  thou 


^  Of  uncertain  meaning. 

^  Burnouf  has  read  A'andraprabha,  moon-bright. 
^  I.e.  belonging  to  the  mystic  rite,  called  Apokasiwa  in  Pali ;  for 
which  I  refer  to  Spence  Hardy,  Eastern  Monachism,  p.  252  seq. 


XXIII.  GADGADASVARA.  395 

must  not  conceive  a  low  opinion  of  it.  That  world, 
young  man  of  good  family,  has  ups  and  downs,  con- 
sists of  earth,  is  replete  with  mountains  of  Kala, 
filled  with  gutters  \  The  Lord  ^'akyamuni,  the 
Tathagata,  &c.,  is  short  of  stature^,  and  so  are  the 
Bodhisattvas  Mahasattvas,  whereas  thou,  young  man 
of  good  family,  hast  got  a  body  forty-two  hundred 
thousand  yo^anas  ^  high,  and  myself  have  got  a 
body  sixty-eight  hundred  thousand  yo^^^anas  high. 
And,  young  man  of  good  family,  thou  art  lovely, 
handsome,  of  pleasant  appearance,  endowed  with  a 
full  bloom  of  extremely  fine  colour,  and  abundantly 
blest  with  hundred  thousands  of  holy  signs.  There- 
fore then,  young  man  of  good  family,  when  you  have 
come  to  the  Saha-world,  do  not  conceive  a  low 
opinion  of  the  Tathagata,  nor  of  the  Bodhisattvas, 
nor  of  that  Buddha-field. 

Thus  addressed,  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Gad- 
gadasvara  said  to  the  Lord  Kamaladalavimalana- 
kshatrara^asankusumitabhi^c^;1a,  the  Tathagata,  &c.  : 
I  shall  do.  Lord,  as  the  Lord  commands  ;  I  shall  go  to 
that  Saha-world  by  virtue  of  the  Lord's  resolution, 
of  the  Lord's  power,  of  the  Lord's  might,  of  the 
Lord's  disposal,  of  the  Lord's  foresight.  Whereon 
the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Gadgadasvara,  without 
leaving  that   Buddha-field  and  without  leaving  his 


^  Gutho</illa  or  gutho^/igalla;  according  to  Burnouf  the  word 
means  'ordures;'  cf.  above,  p.  142,  and  Pali  oligalla. 

"^  Spence  Hardy,  Manual  of  Buddhism,  p.  364:  '  Buddha  is  some- 
times said  to  be  twelve  cubits  in  height,  and  sometimes  eighteen 
cubits.' 

^  That  is  considerably  more  than  Rahu,  the  eclipse,  was  pos- 
sessed of,  his  body  being  no  more  than  forty-eight  hundred 
yo^anas  high ;  Spence  Hardy,  1.  c. 


39^  SADDHARMA-PU;VZ)ARiKA.  XXIII. 


seat,  plunged  into  so  deep  a  meditation  that  imme- 
diately after,  on  a  sudden,  there  appeared  before  the 
Tathagata  on  the  G/^/dhrakla/a-mountains  in  the 
Saha-world  eighty-four  hundred  thousand  myriads 
of  ko/Is  of  lotuses  on  gold  stalks  with  silver  leaves 
and  with  cups  of  the  hue  of  rosy  lotuses  and  Butea 
Frondosa. 

On  seeing  the  appearance  of  this  mass  of  lotuses 
the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  MsLUg-usn,  the  prince 
royal,  asked  the  Lord  6'akyamuni,  the  Tathagata,  &c. : 
By  what  cause  and  by  whom,  O  Lord,  have  been 
produced  these  eighty-four  hundred  thousand  myriads 
of  ko/is  of  lotuses  on  gold  stalks  with  silver  leaves 
and  with  cups  of  the  hue  of  rosy  lotuses  and  Butea 
Frondosa  ?  Whereon  the  Lord  replied  to  Ma;^f  um\ 
the  prince  royal:  It  is,  Ma;^^u^ri,  the  Bodhisattva 
Mahasattva  Gadgadasvara,  who  accompanied  and 
attended  by  eighty-four  hundred  thousand  myriads 
of  ko/is  of  Bodhisattvas  arrives  from  the  east,  from 
the  world  VairoZ'anarai-mipratima/^^ita,  the  Buddha- 
field  of  the  Lord  Kamaladalavimalanakshatrara- 
^asahkusumitabhi^;^a,  the  Tathagata,  &c.,  at  this 
Saha-world  to  see,  salute,  wait  upon  me,  and  to  hear 
this  Dharmaparyaya  of  the  Lotus  of  the  True  Law. 
Then  Ma;^^um,  the  prince  royal,  said  to  the  Lord : 
What  mass  of  roots  of  goodness,  Q  Lord,  has  that 
young  man  of  good  family  collected,  that  he  has 
deserved  to  obtain  such  a  distinction  ?  And  what 
meditation  is  it,  O  Lord,  that  the  Bodhisattva 
practises  ?  Let  us  also  learn  that  meditation,  O 
Lord,  and  practise  that  meditation.  And  let  us  see 
that  Bodhisattva,  Lord;  see  how  the  colour,  outward 
shape,  character,  figure,  and  behaviour  of  that  Bodhi- 
sattva is.     May  the  Lord  deign  to  produce  such  a 


XXIII.  GADGADASVARA.  397 


token  that   the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  be    admo- 
nished by  it  to  come  to  this  Saha-world. 

Then   the   Lord  ^akyamuni,  the  Tathagata,  &c., 
said  to  the  Lord  Prabhutaratna,  the  Tathagata,  &c., 
who  was  completely  extinct :   Produce  such  a  token, 
Lord,  that  the   Bodhisattva   Mahasattva    Gadgada- 
svara  be  admonished  by  it  to   come  to  this  Saha- 
world.      And  the    Lord   Prabhtjtaratna,  the  Tatha- 
gata,   &c.,  who   was    completely    extinct,    instantly 
produced  a  token  in  order  to  admonish  the  Bodhi- 
sattva Mahasattva  Gadgadasvara  (and  said) :  Come, 
young    man    of  good    family,   to    this    Saha-world; 
MsLUonsri,  the    prince    royal,  will    hail    thy  coming. 
And   the    Bodhisattva    Mahasattva    Gadgadasvara, 
after  humbly  saluting  the    feet    of    the   Lord    Ka- 
maladalavimalanakshatrara^asankusumitabhi^;1a,  the 
Tathaeata,  &c.,  and  after  three  times  circumambu- 
lating  him  from   left  to    right,  vanished    from    the 
world  Vairo/^anara^mipratimaz/rt'ita,  along  with  eighty- 
four  hundred  thousand  myriads  of  ko/is  of  Bodhi- 
sattvas   who    surrounded    and   followed    him,    and 
arrived  at  this  Saha-world,  among  a  stir  of  Buddha- 
fields,  a  rain  of  lotuses,  a  noise  of  hundred  thousands 
of  myriads  of  ko/is  of  musical  instruments.    His  face 
showed  eyes  resembling  blue  lotuses,  his  body  was 
gold-coloured,    his    person   marked    by   a   hundred 
thousand   of  holy  signs;    he    sparkled  with   lustre, 
glowed  with    radiance,   had   limbs    marked   by  the 
characteristic  signs,  and  a  body  compact  as  Nara- 
yawa's.    Mounted  on  a  tower  made  of  seven  precious 
substances,  he  moved  through  the  sky  to  a  height 
of  seven   Talas\  surrounded  by  a  host  of  Bodhi- 

*  Or  spans.     There  are  seven  regions  of  winds.     Vayu,  the  god 
of  wind  or  air,  is  nearly  akin  to  Indra  and  Vish«u. 


398  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  XXIIT. 

sattvas,  in  the  direction  of  this  Saha-world,  and  ap- 
proached the  Gr^'dhraku/a,  the  king  of  mountains. 
At  his  arrival,  he  ahghted  from  the  tower,  and  went, 
with  a  necklace  of  pearls  worth  a  hundred  thousands, 
to  the  place  where  the  Lord  was  sitting.  After 
humbly  saluting  the  feet  of  the  Lord,  and  circum- 
ambulating him  seven  times  from  left  to  right,  he 
offered  him  the  necklace  of  pearls  in  token  of 
homage,  whereafter  he  said  to  the  Lord :  The 
Lord  Kamaladalavimalanakshatrara^asahkusumita- 
hhio-Tia,  the  Tathagata,  &c.,  inquires  after  the  Lord's 
health,  welfare,  and  sprightliness ;  whether  he  feels 
free  from  affliction  and  at  ease.  That  Lord  has  also 
charged  me  to  ask :  Is  there  something  thou  hast  to 
suffer  or  allow  ^  ?  the  humours  of  the  body  are  not 
in  an  unfavourable  state  ?  thy  creatures  are  decent 
in  manners,  tractable,  and  easy  to  be  healed  ?  their 
bodies  are  clean  ?  They  are  not  too  passionate,  I 
hope,  not  too  irascible,  not  too  unwise  in  their  doings? 
They  are  not  jealous.  Lord,  not  envious,  not  un- 
grateful to  their  father  and  mother,  not  impious,  not 
heterodox,  not  unsubdued  in  mind,  not  unrestrained 
in  sexual  desires  ?  Are  the  creatures  able  to  resist 
the  Evil  One  ?  Has  the  Lord  Prabhutaratna,  the 
Tathagata,  &c.,  who  is  completely  extinct,  come  to 
the  Saha-world  in  order  to  hear  the  law,  sitting  in 
the  centre  of  a  Stupa  made  of  seven  precious  sub- 
stances ?  And  as  to  that,  Lord  Prabhutaratna,  the 
Tathagata,  &c.,  the  Lord  Kamaladalavimalanaksha- 
trara^asahkusumitabhi^;^a,  inquires  :   Is  there  some- 

^  Yapaniya;  it  is  a  usual  medical  term  applied  to  diseases 
which  can  be  alleviated  to  a  certain  extent  by  means  of  palliatives, 
but  can  no  longer  be  cured.  It  is  manifest  from  the  sequel  that  here 
also  the  term  is  derived  from  medical  practice. 


XXIII.  GADGADASVARA.  399 


thine  that  the  Lord  Prabhiitaratna,  &c.,  has  to 
suffer  or  allow  ?  Is  the  Lord  Prabhutaratna,  &c., 
to  stay  long  ?  We  also,  O  Lord,  are  desirous  of 
seeing  the  rudimentary  frame  ^  of  that  Lord  Pra- 
bhutaratna, the  Tathagata,  &c.  May  the  Lord  there- 
fore please  to  show  us  the  rudimentary  frame  of  the 
Lord  Prabhutaratna,  the  Tathagata,  &c. 

Then  the  Lord  ^akyamuni,  the  Tathagata,  &c., 
said  to  the  Lord  Prabhutaratna,  the  Tathagata,  &c., 
who  was  completely  extinct :  Lord,  the  Bodhisattva 
Mahasattva  Gadgadasvara  here  wishes  to  see  the 
Lord  Prabhutaratna,  the  Tathagata,  &c.,  who  is  com- 
pletely extinct.  Whereon  the  Lord  Prabhutaratna, 
the  Tathagata,  &c.,  spoke  to  the  Bodhisattva  Maha- 
sattva Gadofadasvara  in  this  strain  :  Well  done,  well 
done,  young  gentleman,  that  thou  hast  come  hither  in 
the  desire  to  see  the  Lord  ^akyamuni,  the  Tathagata, 
&c. ;  to  hear  this  Dharmaparyaya  of  the  Lotus  of  the 
True  Law,  and  see  MaJl^usn,  the  prince  royal. 

Subsequently  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Pad- 
mam  said  to  the  Lord :  What  root  of  goodness  has 
the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Gadgadasvara  formerly 
planted  ?  And  in  presence  of  which  Tathagata  ? 
And  the  Lord  ^'akyamuni,  the  Tathagata,  &c., 
said  to  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Padmam :  In 
the  days  of  yore,  young  man  of  good  family,  at  a 
past  period  2  there  appeared  in  the  world  a  Tatha- 
gata called  Meghadundubhisvarara^a  (i.e.  the  king  of 
the  drum- sound  of  the  clouds),  perfectly  enlightened, 
endowed  with  science  and  conduct,  a  Sugata,  &c.,  in 


^  Dhatuvigraha,  the  frame  of  the  elementary  parts,  of  the  bone 
relics. 

2  In  the  margin  is  added  the  common  phrase,  '  at  a  time  more 
incalculable  than  incalculable  ^Eons.' 


400  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARtKA.  XXIII. 

the  world  Sarvabuddhasandar^-ana  (i.  e.  sight  or  dis- 
play of  all  Buddhas),  in  the  JEon  Priyadarj-ana.  To 
that  Lord  Meghadundubhisvarara^a  the  Bodhisattva 
Mahasattva  Gadgadasvara  paid  homage  by  making 
resound  hundred  thousands  of  musical  instruments 
during  twelve  thousand  years.  He  presented  to  him 
also  eighty-four  thousand  vessels  of  seven  precious 
substances.  Under  the  preaching^  of  the  Tathagata 
Meghadundubhisvarara^a,  young  man  of  good  family, 
has  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Gadgadasvara  "ob- 
tained such  a  beauty  as  he  now  displays.  Perhaps, 
young  man  of  good  family,  thou  hast  some  doubt, 
uncertainty  or  misgiving,  (and  thinkest)  that  at  that 
time,  that  epoch,  there  was  another  Bodhisattva  Maha- 
sattva called  Gadgadasvara,  who  paid  that  homage 
to  the  Lord  Meghadundubhisvarara^a,the  Tathagata, 
and  presented  him  the  eighty-four  thousand  vessels. 
But,  young  man  of  good  family,  do  not  think  so.  For 
it  was  the  very  same  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Gad- 
gadasvara, young  man  of  good  family,  who  paid  that 
homage  to  the  Lord  Meghadundubhisvarara^a,  the 
Tathagata,  and  presented  to  him  the  eighty-four 
thousand  vessels.  So,  young  man  of  good  family,  the 
Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Gadgadasvara  has  waited 
upon  many  Buddhas,  has  planted  good  roots  under 
many  Buddhas,  and  prepared  the  soil  under  each  of 
them.  And  this  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Gadgada- 
svara had  previously  seen  Lords  Buddhas  similartothe 
sands  of  the  river  Ganges.  Dost  thou  see,  Padma^ri, 
how  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Gadgadasvara  now 
looks  ?  Padma^ri  replied  :  I  do.  Lord  ;  I  do,  Sugata. 
The   Lord   said :  Now,  Padma^ri,  this  Bodhisattva 

'  Prava-^ane. 


XXITI.  GADGADASVARA.  40 1 


Mahasattva  Gadgadasvara  preaches  this  Dharma- 
paryaya  of  the  Lotus  of  the  True  Law  under  many 
shapes  he  assumes ;  sometimes  ^  under  the  shape  of 
Brahma,  sometimes  under  that  of  Indra,  sometimes 
under  that  of  K^iva,  sometimes  under  that  of  Kubera, 
sometimes  under  that  of  a  sovereign,  sometimes 
under  that  of  a  duke,  sometimes  under  that  of  a 
chief  merchant,  sometimes  under  that  of  a  citizen, 
sometimes  under  that  of  a  villager,  sometimes  under 
that  of  a  Brahman 2.  Sometimes  again  the  Bodhi- 
sattva  Mahasattva  Gadgadasvara  preaches  this 
Dharmaparyaya  of  the  Lotus  of  the  True  Law 
under  a  monk's  shape,  sometimes  under  a  nun's, 
sometimes  under  a  male  lay  devotee's,  sometimes 
under  a  female  lay  devotee's,  sometimes  under  that 
of  a  chief  merchant's  wife,  sometimes  under  that  of 
a  citizen's  wife,  sometimes  under  a  boy's,  sometimes 
under  a  girl's  shape.  With  so  many  variations  in 
the  manner  to  show  himself  ^  the  Bodhlsattva  Maha- 
sattva Gadgadasvara  preaches  this  Dharmaparyaya 
of  the  Lotus  of  the  True  Law  to  creatures.  He  has 
even  assumed  the  shape  of  a  goblin  to  preach  this 
Dharmaparyaya  to  such  as  were  to  be  converted  by 
a  goblin.  To  some  he  has  preached  this  Dharma- 
paryaya of  the  Lotus  of  the  True  Law  under  the 
shape  of  a  demon,  to  some  under  a  Garua^a's,  to  some 
under  a  Kinnara's,  to  some  under  a  great  serpent's 
shape.     Even  to  the  beings  in  any  of  the  wretched 


^  Or  somewhere. 

^  From  this  one  may  infer  that  Gadgadasvara,  i.  e.  he  who  has 
an  interrupted  sound,  is  Vayu,  nveina,  inspiration  personified.  Ma- 
terially, though  not  mythologically.  Wind  is  identical  with  Rudra, 
Storm. 

^  lyadbhi  riipasandar^aneryapathaiA. 

[21]  D  d 


402  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARlKA.  XXIII. 

States,  in  the  hells,  the  brute  creation,  Yama's  realm, 
the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Gadgadasvara  is  a  sup- 
porter. Even  to  the  creatures  in  the  gynseceums 
of  this  Saha-world  has  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva 
Gadgadasvara,  after  metamorphosing  himself  into 
a  woman,  preached  this  Dharmaparyaya  of  the  Lotus 
of  the  True  Law.  Verily,  Padmairi,  the  Bodhisattva 
Mahasattva  Gadgadasvara  is  the  supporter  of  the 
creatures  livine  in  this  Saha-world  ^  Under  so 
many  shapes,  assumed  at  will,  has  the  Bodhisattva 
Mahasattva  Gadgadasvara  preached  this  Dharma- 
paryaya of  the  Lotus  of  the  True  Law  to  creatures. 
Yet,  there  is  no  diminution  of  wisdom,  nor  dimi- 
nution of  magic  power  in  that  good  man^  So  many, 
young  man  of  good  family,  are  the  manifestations  of 
knowledge  by  which  this  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva 
Gadgfadasvara  has  made  himself  known  in  this  Saha- 
world.  In  other  worlds  also,  similar  to  the  sands 
of  the  river  Ganges,  he  preaches  the  law,  under  the 
shape  of  a  Bodhisattva  to  such  as  must  be  converted 
by  a  Bodhisattva ;  under  the  shape  of  a  disciple  to 
such  as  must  be  converted  by  a  disciple  ;  under  the 
shape  of  a  Pratyekabuddha  to  such  as  must  be  con- 

^  Vayu,  pra7;a,  breath  of  life,  is  the  supporter  of  creatures. 

^  Satpurusha;  the  real  meaning  is  '  the  existing  spirit;'  air, 
breath,  life,  which  shows  itself  in  a  diversity  of  forms.  That  living 
breath  is  not  only  the  supporter  of  creatures,  but  also  a  constant 
admonisher  of  the  transitoriness  of  life,  who  addresses  his  call  to 
young  and  old,  sages  and  fools,  &c.  The  important  mystic  rite  of 
inspiration  and  expiration  is  described  by  Spence  Hardy,  Eastern 
Monachism,  p.  267  ;  no  less  value  is  attached  to  prawayamain  the 
Yoga  system  and  in  Indian  mysticism  in  general;  see  e.g.  Yoga- 
jastrall,  49-51;  Sarvadar^ana-Sangraha,  p.  175;  the  term  prawa- 
yama  not  only  denotes  stopping  of  the  breath,  as  the  Dictionaries 
explain  it,  but  also  the  regulation  and  measuring  of  the  breath. 


XXIII.  GADGADASVARA.  40; 


verted  by  a  Pratyekabuddha  ;  under  the  shape  of  a 
Tathagata  to  such  as  must  be  converted  by  a  Tatha- 
gata.  Nay,  he  will  show  to  those  who  must  be  con- 
verted by  a  rehc  of  the  Tathagata  himself  such  a 
rehc,  and  to  those  who  must  be  converted  by  com- 
plete extinction  he  will  show  himself  completely 
extinct \  Such  is  the  powerful  knowledge,  Padmai-ri, 
the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  is  possessed  of. 

Thereafter  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Padmam 
said  to  the  Lord :  The  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva 
Gadgadasvara  then  has  planted  good  roots,  Lord. 
What  meditation  is  it,  Lord,  whereby  the  Bodhisattva 
Mahasattva  Gadgadasvara,  with  unshaken  firmness, 
has  converted  (or  educated)  so  many  creatures  ? 
Whereupon  the  Lord  6'akyamuni,  the  Tathagata,  &c., 
replied  to  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Padmam  :  It 
is,  young  man  of  good  family,  the  meditation  termed 
Sarvarupasandarjrana.  By  steadiness  in  it  has  the 
Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Gadgadasvara  so  immensely 
promoted  the  weal  of  creatures. 

While  this  chapter  of  Gadgadasvara  was  being 
expounded-,  all  the  eighty-four  hundred  thousand 
myriads  of  ko/is  of  Bodhisattvas  Mahasattvas  who, 
along  with  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Gadgada- 
svara, had  come   to   the   Saha-world,  obtained   the 


^  Gadgadasvara,  being  both  inspiration  and  expiration,  appears 
under  the  form  of  a  dead  corpse,  and  thereby  converts  fickle  and 
thoughtless  men. 

2  It  need  not  be  observed  that  the  chapter  was  not  expounded, 
the  Buddha  being  one  of  the  dramatis  personse,  one  of  the  in- 
terlocutors, but  not  the  narrator.  This  confusion  between  epical 
and  dramatical  exposition  is  one  of  the  most  striking  features  of 
the  Lotus.  The  Saddharma,  the  law  of  nature,  may  be  said  to 
have  been  expounded  by  the  Tathagata,  not,  however,  the  com- 
position which  bears  that  tide. 

D  d  2 


404  SADDHARMA-PUiS^DARfKA.  XXIII. 


meditation  Sarvarupasandari-ana,  and  as  to  the  num- 
ber of  Bodhisattvas  Mahasattvas  of  this  Saha-world 
obtaining  the  meditation  Sarvarupasandar^ana,  it 
was  beyond  calculation. 

Then  the  Bodhisattva  Mahisattva  Gadgadasvara, 
after  having  paid  great  and  ample  worship  to  the 
Lord  6'akyamuni,  the  Tathagata,  &c.,  and  at  the 
Stupa  of  relics  of  the  Lord  Prabhtitaratna,  the  Tatha- 
gata, &c.,  again  mounted  the  tower  made  of  seven 
precious  substances,  among  the  stir  of  the  fields,  the 
rain  of  lotuses,  the  noise  of  hundred  thousands  of 
myriads  of  ko/is  of  musical  instruments  \  and  with 
the  eighty-four  hundred  thousand  myriads  of  ko/is  of 
Bodhisattvas  surrounding  and  following  him,  returned 
to  his  own  Buddha-field.  At  his  arrival  there  he  said 
to  the  Lord  Kamaladalavimalanakshatrara^asaiiku- 
sumitabhi^^^a,  the  Tathagata,  &c. :  O  Lord,  I  have 
in  the  Saha-world  promoted  the  weal  of  creatures ;  I 
have  seen  and  saluted  the  Stupa  of  relics  of  the  Lord 
Prabhutaratna,  the  Tathagata,  &c. ;  I  have  seen  and 
saluted  the  Lord  6'akyamuni,  the  Tathagata,  &c. ;  I 
have  seen  Ma;^^u5ri,  the  prince  royal,  as  well  as  the 
Bodhisattva  Bhaisha^ara^a,  who  is  possessed  of 
mighty  knowledge  and  impetuosity  ^  and  the  Bodhi- 
sattva Mahasattva  Pradana^ura ;  and  these  eighty- 
four  hundred  thousand  myriads  of  ko^'is  of  Bodhi- 


^  After  a  last  effort  the  storm  subsides. 

2  This  quality  stamps  Bhaisha^yara^a  as  Rudra;  cf,  Rig-veda  II, 
33,  7.  He  is  essentially  the  same  with  Dhanvantari  the  physician, 
Arcitenens  Apollo.  He  is,  moreover,  the  same  with  Gadgadasvara, 
who  is  represented  as  breath  of  life.  About  the  system  of  splitting 
up  one  natural  phenomenon  or  abstraction  into  more  beings, 
see  p.  4,  note. 


/ 
/ 


XXIII.  GADGADASVARA.  405 

sattvas  Mahasattvas  have  all  obtained  the  meditation 
termed  Sarvardpasandar^ana. 

And  while  this  relation  of  the  going  and  coming 
of  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Gadgadasvara  was 
being  delivered,  forty-two  thousand  Bodhisattvas 
acquired  the  faculty  of  acquiescence  in  future  things, 
and  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Padma^^ri  acquired 
the  meditation  called  the  Lotus  of  the  True  Law. 


406  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  XXIV. 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 

CHAPTER    CALLED    THAT    OF    THE    ALL-SIDED    ONE,    CON- 
TAINING A  DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  TRANSFORMATIONS 
OF  AVALOKITE^VARA^ 

Thereafter  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Aksha- 
yamati  rose  from  his  seat,  put  his  upper  robe  upon 
one  shoulder,  stretched  his  joined  hands  towards 
the  Lord,  and  said  :  For  what  reason,  O  Lord,  is 
the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Avalokite^vara  called 
Avalokite^vara  ?  So  he  asked,  and  the  Lord  an- 
swered to  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Akshayamati : 
All  the  hundred  thousands  of  myriads  of  ko^is  of 
creatures,  young  man  of  good  family,  who  in  this 
world  are  suffering  troubles  will,  if  they  hear  the 
name  of  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Avalokite^vara, 
be  released  from  that  mass  of  troubles.  Those  who 
shall  keep  the  name  of  this  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva 
Avalokite5"vara,  young  man  of  good  family,  will,  if 
they  fall  into  a  great  mass  of  fire,  be  delivered 
therefrom  by  virtue  of  the  lustre  of  the  Bodhisattva 
Mahasattva.  In  case,  young  man  of  good  family, 
creatures,  carried  off  by  the  current  of  rivers,  should 
implore  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Avaloklte^vara, 
all  rivers  will  afford  them  a  ford.  In  case,  young  riian 
of  good  family,  many  hundred  thousand  myriads  of 
ko/Is   of  creatures,  sailing  in  a  ship  on  the  ocean, 

^  A   translation    of  this   chapter  from  the   Chinese   has   been 
published  by  Rev.  S.  Beal  in  his  Catena,  pp.  389-396. 


XXIV.  THE    ALL-SIDED    ONE.  4O7 

should  see  their  bulHon,  gold,  gems,  pearls,  lapis  lazuli, 
conch  shells,  stones  (?),  corals,  emeralds,  Musaragal- 
vas,  read  pearls  (?),  and  other  goods  lost,  and  the 
ship  by  a  vehement,  untimely  gale  cast  on  the  island 
of  Giantesses  ^  and  if  in  that  ship  a  single  being 
implores  Avalokitei^vara,  all  will  be  saved  from  that 
island  of  Giantesses.  For  that  reason,  young  man 
of  good  family,  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Avalo- 
kitei'vara  is  named  Avalokite^vara^. 

If  a  man  given  up  to  capital  punishment^  im- 
plores Avalokitei"vara,  young  man  of  good  family, 
the  swords  of  the  executioners  shall  snap  asunder  *. 
Further,  young  man  of  good  family,  if  the  whole 
triple  chiliocosm  were  teeming  with  goblins  and 
giants,  they  would  by  virtue  of  the  name  of  the 
Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Avalokitei'vara  being  pro- 
nounced lose  the  faculty  of  sight  in  their  wicked 
designs ^     If  some    creature,   young   man  of  good 


^  In  the  Kara«</a-vyuha,  a  work  entirely  devoted  to  the  glorifi- 
cation of  Avalokitei'vara  and  his  sublime  achievements,  the  isle 
of  the  Giantesses  is  identified  with  Ceylon ;  see  pp.  45  and  53  of 
that  work  (Calcutta  edition),  and  the  extract  given  by  Burnouf, 
Introduction,  pp.  221-227. 

^  Avalokita  means  'beheld;'  it  is  as  such  synonymous  with 
dr/sh/a,  seen,  visible,  and  pratyaksha,  visible,  manifest,  present. 
The  Bodhisattva  is  everywhere  present,  and  therefore  implored  in 
need  and  danger.  If  we  take  avalokita  as  a  substantive  in  the 
neuter  gender,  the  compound  will  mean  '  the  Lord  of  view,  of 
regard,'  with  which  one  may  compare  diva's  epithet  Drish/iguru, 
the  Master  of  view. 

^  Vadhyotsish/a;  I  do  not  feel  certain  of  the  rendering  of 
u/^^^ish/a;  perhaps  we  should  translate  it  by  '  a  reprobate  con- 
demned to  capital  punishment.' 

*  Vadhyaghatakana»2  tani  sastrani  (sic)  vi^iryeyUi^. 

^  It  is  well  known  that  those  children  of  darkness  are  unable  to 
stand  the  sun's  light. 


408  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARlKA.  XXIV. 

family,  shall  be  bound  in  wooden  or  iron  manacles, 
chains  or  fetters,  be  he  guilty  or  innocent,  then 
those  manacles,  chains  or  fetters  shall  give  way  as 
soon  as  the  name  of  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva 
Avalokitei'vara  is  pronounced.  Such,  young  man  of 
good  family,  is  the  power  of  the  Bodhisattva  Maha- 
sattva Avalokite^vara.  If  this  whole  triple  chilio- 
cosm,  young  man  of  good  family,  were  teeming  with 
knaves,  enemies,  and  robbers  armed  with  swords, 
and  if  a  merchant  leader  of  a  caravan  marched  with 
a  caravan  rich  in  jewels ;  if  then  they  perceived 
those  robbers,  knaves,  and  enemies  armed  with 
swords,  and  in  their  anxiety  and  fright  thought 
themselves  helpless  ;  if,  further,  that  leading  mer- 
chant spoke  to  the  caravan  in  this  strain :  Be  not 
afraid,  young  gentlemen,  be  not  frightened ;  invoke, 
all  of  you,  with  one  voice  the  Bodhisattva  Maha- 
sattva Avalokitei'vara,  the  giver  of  safety;  then  you 
shall  be  delivered  from  this  danger  by  which  you 
are  threatened  at  the  hands  of  robbers  and  enemies ; 
if  then  the  whole  caravan  with  one  voice  invoked 
Avalokitei-vara  with  the  words  :  Adoration,  adoration 
be  to  the  giver  of  safety,  to  A  valokite-^vara  Bodhisattva 
Mahasattva !  then,  by  the  mere  act  of  pronouncing 
that  name,  the  caravan  would  be  released  from  all 
danger.  Such,  young  man  of  good  family,  is  the 
power  of  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Avalokite- 
^vara.  In  case  creatures  act  under  the  impulse 
of  impure  passion,  young  man  of  good  family,  they 
will,  after  adoring  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Ava- 
lokitei'vara,  be  freed  from  passion.  Those  who  act 
under  the  impulse  of  hatred  will,  after  adoring  the 
Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Avalokitei'vara,  be  freed 
from  hatred.     Those  who  act  under  the  impulse  of 


XXIV.  THE    ALL-SIDED    ONE.  4O9 


infatuation  will,  after  adoring  the  Bodhisattva  Maha- 
sattva  Avalokitewara,  be  freed  from  infatuation.  So 
mighty,  young  man  of  good  family,  is  the  Bodhisattva 
Mahasattva  Avalokite^vara.  If  a  woman,  desirous 
of  male  offspring,  young  man  of  good  family,  adores 
the  Bodhisattva  Avalokite^vara,  she  shall  get  a  son, 
nice,  handsome,  and  beautiful ;  one  possessed  of  the 
characteristics  of  a  male  child,  generally  beloved  and 
winning,  who  has  planted  good  roots ^  If  a  woman 
is  desirous  of  getting  a  daughter,  a  nice,  handsome, 
beautiful  girl  shall  be  born  to  her ;  one  possessed  of 
the  (good)  characteristics  of  a  girl  2,  generally  beloved 
and  winning,  who  has  planted  good  roots.  Such, 
young  man  of  good  family,  is  the  power  of  the  Bodhi- 
sattva Mahasattva  Avalokite^vara. 

Those  who  adore  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva 
Avalokite^vara  will  derive  from  it  an  unfailing  profit. 
Suppose,  young  man  of  good  family,  (on  one  hand) 
some  one  adoring  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Ava- 
lokitewara and  cherishing  his  name ;  (on  the  other 
hand)  another  adoring  a  number  of  Lords  Buddhas 
equal  to  sixty- two  times  the  sands  of  the  river 
Ganges^  cherishing  their  names  and  worshipping  so 
many  Lords  Buddhas  during  their  stay,  existence, 
and  life,  by  giving  robes,  alms-bowls,  couches,  medi- 
caments for  the  sick;  how  great  is  then  in  thine 
opinion,  young  man  of  good  family,  the  accumulation 
of  pious  merit  which  that  young  gentleman  or  young 
lady  will  produce  in  consequence  of  it  ?     So  asked. 


^  We  should  rather  say :  in  whom  a  good  natural  disposition  is 

implanted. 

2  In  the  margin  added  paramaya  j-ubhavar^apushkalataya, 
(and)  of  an  egregiously  blooming  complexion. 

2  Dvashash/inaw  Gahga°. 


410  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARiKA.  XXIV. 

the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Akshayamati  said  to  the 
Lord  :  Great,  O  Lord,  great,  O  Sugata,  is  the  pious 
merit  which  that  young  gentleman  or  young  lady 
will  produce  in  consequence  of  it.  The  Lord  pro- 
ceeded :  Now,  young  man  of  good  family,  the  accu- 
mulation of  pious  merit  produced  by  that  young 
gentleman  paying  homage  to  so  many  Lords  Bud- 
dhas,  and  the  accumulation  of  pious  merit  produced 
by  him  who  performs  were  it  but  a  single  act  of 
adoration  to  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Avaloki- 
te^vara  and  cherishes  his  name,  are  equal.  He 
who  adores  a  number  of  Lords  Buddhas  equal  to 
sixty-two  times  the  sands  of  the  river  Ganges  and 
cherishes  their  names,  and  he  who  adores  the  Bodhi- 
sattva Mahasattva  Avalokite^vara  and  cherishes  his 
name,  have  an  equal  accumulation  of  pious  merit  ^ ; 
both  masses  of  pious  merit  are  not  easy  to  be  de- 
stroyed even  in  hundred  thousands  of  myriads  of 
ko/is  of  ^ons.  So  immense,  young  man  of  good 
family,  is  the  pious  merit  resulting  from  cherishing 
the  name  of  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Avalo- 
kitei'vara. 

Again  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Akshayamati 
said  to  the  Lord  :  How,  O  Lord,  is  it  that  the  Bodhi- 
sattva Mahasattva  A  valokite-^varafrequents  this  Saha- 
world  ?  And  how  does  he  preach  the  law  ?  And  which 
is  the  range  of  the  skilfulness  of  the  Bodhisattva 
Mahasattva  Avalokitei'vara  ?  So  asked,  the  Lord  re- 
plied to  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Akshayamati  : 
In  some  worlds,  young  man  of  good  family,  the 
Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Avalokitei'vara  preaches 
the  law  to   creatures   in   the  shape    of  a   Buddha  ; 


^  Burnouf  has  followed  a  text  of  greater  length. 


XXIV.  THE    ALL-SIDED    ONE.  4II 

in  Others  he  does  so  in  the  shape  of  a  Bodhi- 
sattva.  To  some  beings  he  shows  the  law  in  the 
shape  of  a  Pratyekabuddha ;  to  others  he  does 
so  in  the  shape  of  a  disciple ;  to  others  again 
under  that  of  Brahma,  Indra,  or  a  Gandharva.  To 
those  who  are  to  be  converted  by  a  goblin,  he 
preaches  the  law  assuming  the  shape  of  a  goblin;  to 
those  who  are  to  be  converted  by  l^vara,  he  preaches 
the  law  in  the  shape  of  li'vara ;  to  those  who  are  to 
be  converted  by  Mahei'vara,  he  preaches  assuming 
the  shape  of  Mahei'vara.  To  those  who  are  to  be 
converted  by  a  A'akravartin^  he  shows  the  law 
after  assuming  the  shape  of  a  A'akravartin ;  to 
those  who  are  to  be  converted  by  an  imp,  he  shows 
the  law  under  the  shape  of  an  imp ;  to  those  who 
are  to  be  converted  by  Kubera,  he  shows  the  law  by 
appearing  in  the  shape  of  Kubera ;  to  those  who  are 
to  be  converted  by  Senapati^  he  preaches  in  the 
shape  of  Senapati  ;  to  those  who  are  to  be  con- 
verted by  assuming  a  Brahman  ^  he  preaches  in 
the  shape  of  a  Brahman ;  to  those  who  are 
to  be  converted  by  Va^rapa/a^,  he  preaches  in 
the  shape  of  Vaj^rapa^i^  With  such  inconceivable 
qualities,  young  man  of  good  family,  is  the  Bodhi- 

^  This  term  is  ambiguous ;  it  means  both  '  the  mover  of  the 
wheel,'  i.e.  Vishrau,  and  'an  emperor.' 

^  Ambiguous ;  the  word  denotes  both  '  the  commander-in-chief 
of  the  army  of  the  gods,  Skanda,'  and  '  a  commander-in-chief  in 
general.' 

^  The  Brahman  may  be  Br/haspati. 

*  Va^rapawi  is  the  name  of  one  of  the  Dhyanibuddhas,  and  of 
certain  geniuses,  and  an  epithet  of  Indra. 

^  The  functions  of  Avalokitej-vara,  as  it  appears  from  these  pas- 
sages, agree  with  those  of  Gadgadasvara  mentioned  in  the  fore- 
going chapter.  Both  beings  have  many  qualities  in  common,  just. 
as  Siva,  and  Vishwu  have. 


4T2  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARlKA.  XXTV. 

sattva  Mahasattva  Avalokite^vara  endowed  ^  There- 
fore then,  young  man  of  good  family,  honour  the 
Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Avalokite^vara.  The  Bodhi- 
sattva  Mahasattva  Avalokite^vara,  young  man  of 
good  family,  affords  safety  to  those  who  are  in 
anxiety.  On  that  account  one  calls  him  in  this 
Saha-world  Abhayandada  (i.  e.  Giver  of  Safety). 

Further,  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Akshaya- 
mati  said  to  the  Lord  :  Shall  we  give  a  gift  of  piety, 
a  decoration  of  piety,  O  Lord,  to  the  Bodhisattva 
Mahasattva  Avalokite^-vara  ?  The  Lord  replied  :  Do 
so,  if  thou  thinkest  it  opportune.  Then  the  Bodhi- 
sattva Mahasattva  Akshayamati  took  from  his  neck 
a  pearl  necklace,  worth  a  hundred  thousand  (gold 
pieces),  and  presented  it  to  the  Bodhisattva  Maha- 
sattva Avalokite^vara  as  a  decoration  of  piety,  with 
the  words :  Receive  from  me  this  decoration  of  piety, 
good  man.  But  he  would  not  accept  it.  Then  the 
Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Akshayamati  said  to  the 
Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Avalokite^vara  :  Out  of 
compassion  to  us,  young  man  of  good  family,  accept 
this  pearl  necklace.  Then  the  Bodhisattva  Maha- 
sattva Avalokite^vara  accepted  the  pearl  necklace 
from  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Akshayamati, 
out  of  compassion  to  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva 
Akshayamati  and  the  four  classes,  and  out  of  com- 
passion to  the  gods,  Nagas,  goblins,  Gandharvas, 
demons,  Garu^as,  Kinnaras,  great  serpents,  men, 
and  beings  not  human.  Thereafter  he  divided  (the 
necklace)  into  two  parts,  and  offered  one  part  to 
the  Lord  ^'akyamuni,  and  the  other  to  the  jewel 
Stupa  of  the  Lord  Prabhtitaratna,  the  Tathagata,  &c., 
who  had  become  completely  extinct. 

^  Burnouf  has  followed  another  reading. 


XXIV.  THE    ALL-SIDED    ONE.  413 

With  such  a  faculty  of  transformation,  young  man 
of  good  family,  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Avalo- 
kite^vara  is  moving  in  this  Saha-world. 

And  on  that  occasion  the  Lord  uttered  the  follow- 
ing stanzas : 

1.  A^'itradhva^a  asked  Akshayamati  the  following 
question  :  For  what  reason,  son  of  6^ina,  is  Avaloki- 
tej'vara  (so)  called  ^  ? 

2.  And  Akshayamati,  that  ocean  of  profound  in- 
sight, after  considering  how  the  matter  stood  2,  spoke 
to  -/Titradhva^a :  Listen  to  the  conduct  of  Avaloki- 
tej"vara. 

3.  Hear  from  my  indication  how  for  numerous, 
inconceivable  -^ons  he  has  accomplished  his  vote 
under  many  thousand  ko/is  of  Buddhas. 

4.  Hearing,  seeing,  regularly  and  constantly 
thinking^  will  infallibly  destroy  all  suffering,  (mun- 
dane) existence,  and  grief  of  living  beings  here  on 
earth. 

5.  If  one  be  thrown  into  a  pit  of  fire,  by  a  wicked 
enemy  with  the  object  of  killing  him,  he  has  but 
to  think  of  Avalokite^vara,  and  the  fire  shall  be 
quenched  as  if  sprinkled  with  water. 

6.  If  one  happens  to  fall  into  the  dreadful  ocean, 
the  abode  of  Nagas,  marine  monsters,  and  demons, 
he  has  but  to  think  of  Avalokite^vara,  and  he  shall 
never  sink  down  in  the  king  of  waters  ^ 

^  It  will  be  observed  that  this  poetical  version  here  entirely 
differs  from  the  preceding  prose  introduction.  As  to  the  name  of 
A^itradhva^a,  I  have  not  met  with  it  elsewhere. 

^  Tadr/jata  vilokiya. 

'  Of  whom  or  what?  is  not  expressed.  From  the  sequel  one 
might  be  tempted  to  infer  that  Avalokitejvara,  or  the  exposition  of 
his  power,  is  the  object  of  hearing,  &c. 

*  Smarato  (for  smaratu),  Avalokitejvaraw^alara^e  na  kada/^i  sidati. 


414  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARlKA.  XXIV. 

7.  If  a  man  happens  to  be  hurled  down  from  the 
brink  of  the  Meru,  by  some  wicked  person  with  the 
object  of  kilHng  him,  he  has  but  to  think  of  Ava- 
lokitei-vara,  and  he  shall,  sunlike,  stand  firm  in 
the  sky\ 

8.  If  rocks  of  thunderstone  and  thunderbolts  are 
thrown  at  a  man's  head  to  kill  him,  he  has  but  to 
think  of  Avalokite^vara,  and  they  shall  not  be  able 
to  hurt  one  hair  of  the  body. 

9.  If  a  man  be  surrounded  by  a  host  of  enemies 
armed  with  swords,  who  have  the  intention  of  killing 
him,  he  has  but  to  think  of  Avalokite^vara,  and  they 
shall  instantaneously  become  kind-hearted. 

10.  If  a  man,  delivered  to  the  power  of  the  execu- 
tioners, is  already  standing  at  the  place  of  execution, 
he  has  but  to  think  of  Avalokite^vara,  and  their 
swords  shall  go  to  pieces. 

11.  If  a  person  happens  to  be  fettered  in  shackles 
of  wood  or  iron,  he  has  but  to  think  of  Avalokite- 
^vara,  and  the  bonds  shall  be  speedily  loosened. 

12.  Mighty  spells,  witchcraft,  herbs,  ghosts,  and 
spectres,  pernicious  to  life,  revert  thither  whence 
they  come,  when  one  thinks  of  Avalokite^vara. 

13.  If  a  man  is  surrounded  by  goblins,  Nagas, 
demons,  ghosts,  or  giants,  who  are  in  the  habit  of 
taking  away  bodily  vigour,  he  has  but  to  think  of 
Avalokitejvara,  and  they  shall  not  be  able  to  hurt 
one  hair  of  his  body^. 

1  Smarato  Avalokitejvaro  (r.  °raw)  suryabhutawz  (r.  °to)  va  nabhe 
pratish///ati.  I  have  taken  the  liberty  of  translating  pratishMati 
as  if  the  text  had  pratitish/>^ati.  The  version  of  Beal  has  'stand 
in  space,  fixed  as  the  sun.' 

2  Here  I  have  followed  the  marginal  reading,  which  agrees  with 
Burnoufs.  The  older  text  has  instead  of  thirteen  and  fourteen 
but  one  stanza,  the  translation  of  which  runs  thus :  '  If,  &c.,  sur- 


XXIV.  THE    ALL-SIDED    ONE.  415 

14.  If  a  man  is  surrounded  by  fearful  beasts  with 
sharp  teeth  and  claws,  he  has  but  to  think  of  Avalo- 
kite^vara,  and  they  shall  quickly  fly  in  all  directions. 

15.  If  a  man  is  surrounded  by  snakes  malicious 
and  frightful  on  account  of  the  flames  and  fires  (they 
emit),  he  has  but  to  think  of  Avalokite^vara,  and 
they  shall  quickly  lose  their  poison. 

16.  If  a  heavy  thunderbolt  shoots  from  a  cloud 
pregnant  with  lightning  and  thunder,  one  has  but 
to  think  of  Avalokitewara,  and  the  fire  of  heaven 
shall  quickly,  instantaneously  be  quenched. 

17.  He  (Avalokite-yvara)  with  his  powerful  know- 
ledge beholds  all  creatures  who  are  beset  with 
many  hundreds  of  troubles  and  afflicted  by  many 
sorrows,  and  thereby  is  a  saviour  in  the  world,  in- 
cluding the  gods. 

18.  As  he  is  thoroughly  practised  in  the  power 
of  magic,  and  possessed  of  vast  knowledge  and  skil- 
fulness,  he  shows  himself^  in  all  directions  and  in 
all  regions  of  the  world. 

19.  Birth,  decrepitude,  and  disease  will  come  to 
an  end  for  those  who  are  in  the  wretched  states  of 
existence,  in  hell,  in  brute  creation,  in  the  kingdom 
of  Yama,  for  all  beings  (in  generaP). 

[Then  Akshayamati  in  the  joy  of  his  heart  uttered 
the  following  stanzas^:] 

20.  O  thou  whose  eyes  are  clear,  whose  eyes  are 


rounded  by  Nagas,  marine  monsters,  demons,  ghosts,  or  giants  he 
has,  &c.,  and  they  shall  quickly  fly  in  all  directions.' 

^  Drt'syzte. 

^  We  have  to  understand :  in  consequence  of  the  conduct  of  the 
great  Avalokitejvara. 

^  The  words  in  brackets  have  been  added  in  the  margin  by  a 
later  hand. 


41 6  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARiKA.  XXIV. 


kind,  distinguished  by  wisdom  and  knowledge,  whose 
eyes  are  full  of  pity  and  benevolence  ;  thou  so  lovely 
by  thy  beautiful  face  and  beautiful  eyes ! 

2 1 .  Pure  one,  whose  shine  is  spotless  bright,  whose 
knowledge  is  free  from  darkness,  thou  shining  as  the 
sun,  not  to  be  beaten  away,  radiant  as  the  blaze  of 
fire,  thou  spreadest  in  thy  flying  course  thy  lustre  in 
the  worlds 

2  2.  O  thou  who  rejoicest  in  kindness  having  its 
source  in  compassion,  thou  great  cloud  of  good 
qualities  and  of  benevolent  mind^  thou  quenchest 
the  fire  that  vexes  living  beings,  thou  pourest  out 
nectar,  the  rain  of  the  law. 

23.  In  quarreP,  dispute,  war,  battle,  in  any  great 
dano-er  one  has  to  think  of  A valokite^vara,  who  shall 
quell  the  wicked  troop  of  foes. 

24.  One  should  think  of  Avalokite^vara,  whose 
sound  is  as  the  cloud  s  and  the  drum's,  who  thunders 
like  a  rain-cloud,  possesses  a  good  voice  like  Brahma, 
(a  voice)  going  through  the  whole  gamut  of  tones. 

25.  Think,  O  think  with  tranquil  mood  of  Avalo- 
kitewara,  that  pure  being ;  he  is  a  protector,  a  refuge, 
a  recourse  in  death,  disaster,  and  calamity. 

26.  He  who  possesses  the  perfection  of  all  virtues, 
and  beholds  all  beings  with  compassion  and  bene- 
volence, he,  an  ocean  of  virtues,  Virtue  itself,  he, 
Avalokite^vara,  is  worthy  of  adoration. 


^  Aparahata  anila^alaprabha  (voc.  case)  prapatento  ^agati  viro- 
^asi.  For  anila^ala  I  read  anala^ala  (Sansk.  anala^vala).  Cf. 
Kara«fl'a-vyuha,  p.  43:  Atharyavalokitejvaro  ^valad  ivagnipi«(/am 
akaje  'ntarhita^. 

~  K;7pasawbhutamaitragar^ita  (voc.)  jubhagu;/a  maitramawa 
mahaghana  (voc.) 

^  Kalahe. 


XXIV.  THE    ALL-SIDED    ONE.  41/ 


27.  He,  SO  compassionate  for  the  world,  shall  once 
become  a  Buddha,  destroying  all  dangers  and  sor- 
rows^ ;   I  humbly  bow  to  Avalokite^-vara. 

28.  This  universal  Lord,  chief  of  kings,  who  is  a 
(rich)  mine  of  monastic  virtues,  he,  universally  wor- 
shipped, has  reached  pure,  supreme  enlightenment, 
after  plying  his  course  (of  duty)  during  many  hun- 
dreds of  ^ons. 

29.  At  one  time  standing  to  the  right,  at  another 
to  the  left  of  the  Chief  Amitabha,  whom  he  is  fan- 
ning, he,  by  dint  of  meditation,  like  a  phantom,  in  all 
regions  honours  the  6^ina. 

30.  In  the  west,  where  the  pure  world  Sukhakara^ 
is  situated,  there  the  Chief  Amitabha,  the  tamer  of 
men  ^,  has  his  fixed  abode. 

31.  There  no  women  are  to  be  found;  there 
sexual  intercourse  is  absolutely  unknown  ;  there  the 
sons  of  6'ina,  on  springing  into  existence  by  appari- 
tional  birth,  are  sitting  in  the  undefiled  cups  of 
lotuses. 

32.  And  the  Chief  Amitabha  himself  is  seated  on 
a  throne  in  the  pure  and  nice  cup  of  a  lotus,  and 
shines  as  the  ^'ala-king  ^ 

^  The  present  will  make  room  for  the  future,  life  will  end  in 
death ;  the  living  Avalokitejvara  will  pass  into  the  state  of  Buddha, 
al,  Dharmara^a,  i.e.  Death,  the  great  physician. 

"^  I.  e.  procuring  bliss  or  tranquillity;  the  more  common  name  is 
Sukhavati.  In  Greek  and  Roman  mythology  we  find  the  Insulae 
Fortunatae  and  the  gardens  of  the  Hesperidae  lying  in  the  same 
quarter. 

3  From  this  it  appears  that  Amitabha  or  Amitayus  is  but  another 
name  of  Yama,  and  just  as  Yama  also  governs  the  planet  Saturn, 
it  may  be  held  that  Amitabha,  as  one  of  the  five  Dhyani-Buddhas, 
among  his  other  offices,  is  invested  with  the  dignity  of  being  the 
ruler  of  Saturn. 

*  I  do  not  understand  the  meaning  of  this  compound.     In  the 

[21]  E  e 


A. 


418  SADDHARMA-PUiVZ)ARlKA.  XXIV. 

33.  The  Leader  of  the  world,  whose  store  of  merit 
has  been  praised,  has  no  equal  in  the  triple  world. 
O  supreme  of  men,  let  us  soon  become  like  thee ! 

Thereupon  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Dhara- 
T^indhara  rose  from  his  seat,  put  his  upper  robe  upon 
one  shoulder,  fixed  his  right  knee  against  the  earth, 
stretched  his  joined  hands  towards  the  Lord  and 
said  :  They  must  be  possessed  of  not  a  few  good 
roots,  O  Lord,  who  are  to  hear  this  chapter  from 
the  Dharmaparyaya  about  the  Bodhisattva  Maha- 
sattva Avalokite^vara  and  this  miraculous  power  of 
transformation  of  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Ava- 
lokitej"vara. 

And  while  this  chapter  of  the  All-sided  One  was 
being  expounded  by  the  Lord,  eighty-four  thousand 
living  beings  from  that  assembly  felt  their  minds 
drawn  to  that  supreme  and  perfect  enlightenment, 
with  which  nothing  else  can  be  compared  '. 


next  following  chapter  we  shall  meet  with  a  Tathagata  named 
.Salendrara^a,  i.e.  king  of  the  6'ala-chiefs. 

^  Asamasama;  Burnouf  takes  it  as  'qui  est  ^gal  a  ce  qui  n'a 
pas  d'^gal'     The  term  also  occurs  Lalita-vistara,  p.  114, 1.  9. 


XXV.  ANCIENT    DEVOTION.  4  I  9 


CHAPTER   XXV, 


ANCIENT    DEVOTION  \ 


Thereupon  the  Lord  addressed  the  entire  assem- 
blage of  Bodhisattvas :   Of  yore,  young  men  of  good 
family,  at  a  past  epoch,  incalculable,  more  than  in- 
calculable ^ons  ago,  at  that  time  there  appeared 
in  the  world  a  Tathagata  named  6^aladharagar^ita- 
ghoshasusvaranakshatrara^asahkusumitabhi^??a,    an 
Arhat,  &c.,  endowed  with  science  and  conduct,  &c. 
&c.,  in  the  ^on  Priyadar^ana,  in  the  world  Vairo/^a- 
nara^mipratima;/«^ita.    Now,  there  was,  young  men  of 
good  family,  under  the  spiritual  rule  of  the  Tatha- 
gata    6^aladharagar^itaghoshasusvaranakshatrara^'a- 
sankusumitabhi^v^a  a  king  called  ^'ubhavyuha.    That 
king  6'ubhavyuha,  young  men  of  good  family,  had 
a  wife  called  Vimaladatt^,  and  two  sons,  one  called 
Vimalagarbha,  the  other  Vimalanetra.     These  two 
boys,  who  possessed  magical  power   and  wisdom^, 
applied     themselves     to    the    course    of    duty    of 
Bodhisattvas,  viz.   to    the  perfect  virtues  (Parami- 
tas)    of   almsgiving,    morality,   forbearance,   energy, 
meditation,    wisdom,    and     skilfulness ;    they   were 
accomplished    in    benevolence,    compassion,    joyful 
sympathy   and   indifference,  and    in  all   the    thirty- 


^  Purvayoga;  rather,  ancient  history ;  cf.  p.  153. 
^  In  the  margin  sundry  epithets  have  been  added,  which  here 
are  omitted. 

E  e  2 


420  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  XXV. 

seven  constituents  of  true  knowledge  \  They  had 
perfectly  mastered  the  meditation  Vimala  (i.e.  spot- 
less), the  meditation  Nakshatrara^aditya^the  medita- 
tion Vimalanirbhasa,  the  meditation  Vimalabhasa,  the 
meditation  Alahkarasura^  the  meditation  Mahate^o- 
garbha^  Now  at  that  time,  that  period  the  said 
Lord  preached  the  Dharmaparyaya  of  the  Lotus  of 
the  True  Law  out  of  compassion  for  the  beings  then 
living  and  for  the  king  ^'ubhavyuha.  Then,  young 
men  of  good  family,  the  two  young  princes  Vimala- 
o-arbha  and  Vimalanetra  went  to  their  mother,  to 
whom  they  said,  after  stretching  their  joined  hands  : 
We  should  like  to  go,  mother,  to  the  Lord  6^aladha- 
raear^-itaehoshasusvaranakshatrara^asaiikusumita- 
hhi£-na.,  the  Tathagata,  &c.,  and  that,  mother,  because 
the  Lord  G'aladharagar^itaghoshasusvaranakshatra- 
rafasahkusumitabhi^72a,  the  Tathagata,  &c.,  ex- 
pounds, in  great  extension,  before  the  world,  in- 
cluding the  gods,  the  Dharmaparyaya  of  the  Lotus  of 
the  True  Law.  We  should  like  to  hear  it.  Whereupon 
the  queen  Vimaladatta  said  to  the  two  young  princes 
Vimalagarbha  and  Vimalanetra:  Your  father,  young 
gentlemen,  the  king  6'ubhavyuha,  favours  the  Brah- 


^  Bodhipakshika  or  Bodhapakshika  (dharmas).  They  form  part 
of  the  io8  Dharmalokamukhas  in  LaUta-vistara,  p.  36,  \.  17-p.  38, 
1.  6;  an  enumeration  of  them  is  found  in  Spence  Hardy's  Manual 
of  Buddhism,  p.  497. 

2  Burnoufs  reading  is  Nakshatratarara^aditya,  i.e.  the  Sun, 
king  of  stars  and  asterisms. 

'  So  Burnouf;  my  MS.  has  Alahkara^ubha,  i.e.  splendid  with 
ornaments. 

*  I.e.  having  great  lustre  in  the  interior,  or  womb  of  great  lustre. 
Nirmalanirbhasa  may  mean  both  'spotless  radiance 'and 'having 
a  spotless  radiance;'  Vimalabhasa,  'spotless  shine,'  or  'having  a 
spotless  shine.' 


XXV.  ANCIENT    DEVOTION.  421 


mans.  Therefore  you  will  not  obtain  the  permission 
to  go  and  see  the  Tathagata.  Then  the  two  young 
princes  Vimalagarbha  and  Vimalanetra,  stretching 
their  joined  hands,  said  to  their  mother:  Though 
born  in  a  family  that  adheres  to  a  false  doctrine,  we 
feel  as  sons  to  the  king  of  the  law.  Then,  young 
men  of  good  family,  the  queen  Vimaladatta  said  to 
the  young  princes  :  Well,  young  gentlemen,  out  of 
compassion  for  your  father,  the  king  ^'ubhavyuha, 
display  some  miracle,  that  he  may  become  favourably 
inclined  to  you,  and  on  that  account  grant  you  the 
permission  of  going  to  the  Lord  6^aladharagar^ita- 
ghoshasusvaranakshatrara^asaiikusumitabhi^^/^a,    the 

Tathagata,  &c. 

Immediately  the  young  princes  Vimalagarbha  and 
Vimalanetra  rose  into  the  atmosphere  to  a  height  of 
seven  Tal  trees  ^  and  performed  miracles  such  as  are 
allowed  by  the  Buddha,  out  of  compassion  for  their 
father,  the  king  6'ubhavyiiha.  They  prepared  in  the 
sky  a  couch  and  raised  dust ;  there  they  also  emitted 
from  the  lower  part  of  their  body  a  shower  of  rain, 
and  from  the  upper  part  a  mass  of  fire ;  then  again 
they  emitted  from  the  upper  part  of  their  body  a 
shower  of  rain,  and  from  the  lower  part  a  mass  of 
fire^  While  in  the  firmament  they  became  now  big, 
then  small ;  and  now  small,  then  big.  Then  they 
vanished  from  the  sky  to  come  up  again  from  the 
earth  and  reappear  in  the  air.  Such,  young  men  of 
good  family,  were    the    miracles    produced    by  the 

'  Or  seven  spans,  whatever  may  be  meant  by  it. 

^  A  similar  miracle  was  performed  by  the  Buddha,  according  to 
the  traditions  of  the  Southern  Buddhists,  when  he  had  to  show  his 
superiority  to  the  six  heretical  doctors;  see  Bigandet,  Life  of 
Gaudama,  vol.  i,  p.  218. 


42  2  SADDHARMA-PUiVBARiKA.  XXV. 

magical  power  of  the  two  young  princes,  whereby 
their  father,  the  king  6ubhavyuha,  was  converted. 
At  the  sight  of  the  miracle  produced  by  the  magical 
power  of  the  two  young  princes,  the  king  ^'ubha- 
vy^ha  was  content,  in  high  spirits,  ravished,  rejoiced, 
joyful,  and  happy,  and,  the  joined  hands  raised, 
he  said  to  the  boys  :  Who  is  your  master,  young 
gentlemen  ?  whose  pupils  are  you  ?  And  the  two 
young  princes  answered  the  king  ^'ubhavyuha : 
There  is,  noble  king,  there  exists  and  lives 
a  Lord  6^aladharagar^itaghoshasusvaranakshatrara- 
^asankusumitabhvc^;2a,  a  Tathagata,  &c.;  seated  on 
the  stool  of  law  at  the  foot  of  the  tree  of  enlighten- 
ment ;  he  extensively  reveals  the  Dharmaparyaya 
of  the  Lotus  of  the  True  Law  to  the  world, 
including  the  gods.  That  Lord  is  our  Master,  O 
noble  king  ;  we  are  his  pupils.  Then,  young  gentle- 
men of  good  family,  the  king  ^S^ubhavyuha  said  to 
the  young  princes :  I  will  see  your  Master,  young 
gentlemen ;  I  am  to  go  myself  to  the  presence  of 
that  Lord. 

After  the  two  young  princes  had  descended  from 
the  sky,  young  gentlemen,  they  went  to  their  mother 
and  with  joined  hands  stretched  forward  said  to 
her :  Mother,  we  have  converted  our  father  to 
supreme  and  perfect  knowledge  ;  we  have  performed 
the  office  of  masters  towards  him;  therefore  let  us  go 
now ;  we  wish  to  enter  upon  the  ecclesiastical  life  in 
the  face  of  the  Lord.  And  on  that  occasion,  young 
men  of  good  family,  the  young  princes  Vimalagarbha 
and  Vimalanetra  addressed  their  mother  in  the 
following  two  stanzas  : 

I,  Allow  us,   O  mother,  to  go  forth  from  home 
and    to    embrace   the    houseless    life ;    ay,  we  will 


XXV.  ANCIENT    DEVOTION.  423 


become  ascetics,  for  rare  to  be  met  with  (or  precious) 
is  a  Tathagata. 

2.  As  the  blossom  of  the  glomerated  fig-tree,  nay, 
more  rare  is  the  6^ina.  Let  us  depart;  we  will 
renounce  the  world;  the  favourable  moment  is 
precious  (or  not  often  to  be  met  with). 

Vimaladatta  said : 

3.  Now  I  grant  you  leave;  go,  my  children,  I 
give  my  consent.  I  myself  will  likewise  renounce 
the  world,  for  rare  to  be  met  with  (or  precious)  is 
a  Tathagata. 

Having  uttered  these  stanzas,  young  men  of  good 
family,  the  two  young  princes  said  to  their  parents  : 
Pray,  father  and  mother,  you  also  go  together  with 
us   to  the   Lord   6^aladharagar^itaghoshasusvarana- 
kshatrara^asankusumitabhi^;^a,the  Tathagata,  &c.,  in 
order  to  see,  humbly  salute  and  wait  upon  him,  and  to 
hear  the  law.    For,  father  and  mother,  the  appearance 
of  a  Buddha  is  rare  to  be  met  with  as  the  blossom 
of  the  glomerated  fig-tree,  as  the  entering  of  the  tor- 
toise's neck  into  the  hole  of  the  yoke  formed  by  the 
great  ocean  \     The  appearance  of  Lords  Buddhas, 
father   and    mother,    is    rare.      Hence,    father    and 
mother,  it  is  a  happy  lot  we  have  been  blessed  with, 
to  have  been  born  at  the  time  of  such  a  prophet. 
Therefore,   father  and  mother,   give  us    leave;  we 
would  go  and  become  ascetics  in  presence  ^  of  the 
Lord   G'aladharagar^itaghoshasusvaranakshatrara^a- 
sahkusumitabhi^;la,    the    Tathagata,    &c.,    for    the 


^  I  am  as  unable  to  elucidate  this  comparison  as  Burnouf  was. 
Not  unlikely  the  mythological  tortoise  in  its  quality  of  supporter  of 
the  earth  is  alluded  to. 

2  Saka^e;  Burnouf  has  '  sous  renseignement' (^  a  sane),  which 

is  the  more  usual  phrase. 


424  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  XXV. 


seeing  of  a  Tathagata  is  something  rare.  Such  a 
king  of  the  law  is  rarely  met  with  ;  such  a  favourable 
occasion^  is  rarely  met  with. 

Now  at  that  juncture,  young  men  of  good  family, 
the  eighty-four  thousand  women  of  the  harem  of  the 
king^'ubhavyuha  became  worthy  of  being  receptacles 
of  this  Dharmaparyayaofthe  Lotus  of  the  True  Law. 
The  young  prince  Vimalanetra  exercised  himself  in 
this  Dharmaparyaya,  whereas  the  young  prince  Vi- 
malagarbha  for  many  hundred  thousand  myriads  of 
ko/is  of  ^ons  practised  the  meditation  Sarvasattva- 
papa^ahana  ^  with  the  object  that  all  beings  should 
abandon  all  evils.  And  the  mother  of  the  two 
young  princes,  the  queen  Vimaladatta,  acknowledged 
the  harmony  between  all  Buddhas  and  all  topics 
treated  by  them^  Then,  young  men  of  good  family, 
the  king  ^ubhavyuha,  having  been  converted  to  the 
law  of  the  Tathagata  by  the  instrumentality  of  the 
two  young  princes,  having  been  initiated  and  brought 
to  full  maturity  in  it,  along  with  all  his  relations  and 
retinue;  the  queen  Vimaladatta  with  the  whole 
crowd  of  women  in  her  suite,  and  the  two  young 
princes,  the  sons  of  the  king  ^ubhavyuha,  accom- 
panied by  forty-two  •  thousand  living  beings,  along 
with  the  women  of  the  harem  and  the  ministers, 
went  all  together  and  unanimously  to  the  Lord  (S'ala- 
dharagar^itaghoshasusvaranakshatrara^asaiikusumi- 
tabhi^;^a,  the  Tathagatha,  &c.  On  arriving  at  the 
place  where  the  Lord  was,  they  humbly  saluted  his 


^  Idrt'si  kshawasampad. 

^  I.e.  means  whereby  (all)  evils  are  abandoned  by  all  creatures. 
^  Sarvabuddhasthanani;  in  the  margin  added  the  word  for 
'  secret.' 


XXV.  ANCIENT    DEVOTION.  425 

feet,  circumambulated  him  three  times  from  left  to 
right  and  took  their  stand  at  some  distance. 

Then,  young  men  of  good  family,  the  Lord  6^ala- 
dharagar^itaghoshasusvaranakshatrara^asahkusumi- 
tabhi^/7a,  the  Tathagata,  &c.,  perceiving  the  king 
^Subhavyuha,  who  had  arrived  with  his  retinue,  in- 
structed, roused,  excited,  and  comforted  him  with  a 
sermon.  And  the  king  .Subhavyuha,  young  men  of 
good  family,  after  he  had  been  well  and  duly  in- 
structed, roused,  excited,  and  comforted  by  the  sermon 
of  the  Lord,  was  so  content,  glad,  ravished,  joyful, 
rejoiced,  and  delighted,  that  he  put  his  diadem  on 
the  head  of  his  younger  brother  and  established  him 
in  the  government,  whereafter  he  himself  with  his 
sons,  kinsmen,  and  retinue,  as  well  as  the  queen  Vima- 
ladatta  and  her  numerous  train  of  women,  the  two 
young  princes  accompanied  by  forty-two  ^  thousand 
living  beings  went  all  together  and  unanimously 
forth  from  home  to  embrace  the  houseless  life, 
prompted  as  they  were  by  their  faith  in  the  preach- 
ing of  the  Lord  C'aladharagar^itaghoshasusvarana- 
kshatrara^asankusumitabhi^;1a,  the  Tathagata,  &c. 
Having  become  an  ascetic,  the  king  ^ubhavyuha, 
with  his  retinue,  remained  for  eighty-four  thousand 
years  applying  himself  to  studying,  meditating,  and 
thoroughly  penetrating  this  Dharmaparyaya  of  the 
Lotus  of  the  True  Law.  At  the  end  of  those  eighty- 
four  thousand  years,  young  men  of  good  family,  the 
king  ^'ubhavyuha  acquired  the  meditation  termed 
Sarvagu;/alahkaravyuha  ^     No  sooner  had   he  ac- 

^  Burnouf  has  eighty-four,  but  this  must  be  a  faulty  reading, 
because  the  number  of  forty-two  agrees  with  that  given  above. 

^  I.  e.  collocation  (or  disposition)  of  the  ornaments  of  all 
good  qualities. 


426  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARfKA.  XXV. 

quired  that  meditation,  than  he  rose  seven  Tals  up 
to  the  sky,  and  while  staying  in  the  air,  young  men 
of  good  family,  the  king  ^'ubhavyiiha  said  to  the 
Lord  C^aladharagar^itaghoshasusvaranakshatrara^a- 
sahkusumitabhij^//a,  the  Tathagata,  &c. :  My  two 
sons,  O  Lord,  are  my  masters,  since  it  is  owing  to  the 
miracle  produced  by  their  magical  power  that  I  have 
been  diverted  from  that  great  heap  of  false  doc- 
trines, been  established  in  the  command  of  the  Lord, 
brought  to  full  ripeness  in  it,  introduced  to  it,  and 
exhorted  to  see  the  Lord.  They  have  acted  as 
true  friends  to  me,  O  Lord,  those  two  young  princes 
who  as  sons  were  born  in  my  house,  certainly  to 
remind  me  of  my  former  roots  of  goodness. 

At  these  words  the  Lord  C'aladharagar^itagho- 
shasusvaranakshatrara^asankusumitabhi^/la,  the  Ta- 
thagata, &c.,  spoke  to  the  king  ^'ubhavyuha  :  It  is 
as  thou  sayest,  noble  king.  Indeed,  noble  king,  such 
young  men  or  young  ladies  of  good  family  as  possess 
roots  of  goodness,  will  in  any  existence,  state,  descent, 
rebirth  or  place  ^  easily  find  true  friends,  who  with 
them  shall  perform  the  task  of  a  master  ^  who  shall 
admonish.  Introduce,  fully  prepare  them  to  obtain 
supreme  and  perfect  enlightenment.  It  is  an  exalted 
position,  noble  king,  the  office  of  a  true  friend  who 
rouses  (another)  to  see  the  Tathagata.  Dost  thou 
see  these  two  young  princes,  noble  king  ?  I  do. 
Lord ;    I    do,    Sugata,    said    the    king.     The   Lord 


^  Bhavagati>^yutyupapattyayataneshu.  Burnouf  must  have 
read  bhagava/^/&yu°  or  something  Hke  it,  for  he  translates:  'qui 
sont  n6s  dans  les  Heux  ou  se  sont  accomplies  la  naissance  et  la 
mort  d'un  Bienheureux.' 

*  I.e.  of  a  teacher,  jastrz'kr/tyena. 


XXV.  ANCIENT    DEVOTION.  427 

proceeded  :  Now,  these  two  young  gentlemen,  noble 
king,  will  pay  worship  to  sixty-five  (times  the 
number  of)  Tathagatas,  &c.,  equal  to  the  sands  of 
the  Ganges ;  they  will  keep  this  Dharmaparyaya  of 
the  Lotus  of  the  True  Law,  out  of  compassion  for 
beings  who  hold  false  doctrines,  and  with  the  aim  to 
produce  in  those  beings  an  earnest  striving  after  the 
right  doctrine. 

Thereupon,  young  men  of  good  family,  the  king 
^'ubhavyuha  came  down  from  the  sky,  and,  having 
raised  his  joined  hands,  said  to  the  Lord  6^ala- 
dharagar^itaghoshasusvaranakshatrara^asahkusumi- 
tabhi^;^a,  the  Tathagata,  &c. :  Please,  Lord,  deign  to 
tell  me,  what  knowledge  the  Tathagata  is  possessed 
of,  so  that  the  protuberance  on  his  head  is  shining ; 
that  the  Lord's  eyes  are  so  clear  ;  that  between  his 
brows  the  Ur;^a  (circle  of  hair)  is  shining,  resembling 
in  whiteness  the  moon  ;  that  in  his  mouth  a  row 
of  equal  and  close-standing  teeth  is  glittering ;  that 
the  Lord  has  lips  red  as  the  Bimba  and  such  beau- 
tiful eyes. 

As  the  king  ^Subhavyuha,  young  men  of  good 
family,  had  celebrated  the  Lord  G'aladharagar^ita- 
ghoshasusvaranakshatrara^asahkusumitabhi^;^a,  the 
Tathagata,  &c.,  by  enumerating  so  many  good  qualities 
and  hundred  thousands  of  myriads  of  ko/is  of  other 
good  qualities  besides,  he  said  to  the  Lord  6^aladhara- 
gar^itaghoshasusvaranakshatrara^asahkusumitibhi- 
gn^,  the  Tathagata,  &c. :  It  is  wonderful,  O  Lord,  how 
valuable  the  Tathagata's  teaching  is,  and  with  how 
many  inconceivable  virtues  the  religious  discipline 
proclaimed  by  the  Tathagata  is  attended  ;  how  bene- 
ficial the  moral  precepts  proclaimed  by  the  Tatha- 
gata are.     From  henceforward,  O  Lord,  we  will  no 


K 


428  SADDHARMA-PU;\^Z}ARIKA.  XXV. 

more  be  slaves  to  our  own  mind ;  no  more  be 
slaves  to  false  doctrine  ;  no  more  slaves  to  rashness; 
no  more  slaves  to  the  sinful  thoughts  arising  in  us. 
Being  possessed  of  so  many  good  qualities,  O  Lord, 
I  do  not  wish  to  go  away  from  the  presence  of  the 
Lord  \ 

After  humbly  saluting  the  feet  of  the  Lord  Cala- 
dharaofarc^itaorhoshasusvaranakshatrarac^asaiikusumi- 
tabhi^/Ia,  the  Tathagata,  &c.,  the  king  rose  up  to  the 
sky  and  there  stood.  Thereupon  the  king  ^ubha- 
vyuha  and  the  queen  Vimaladatta  from  the  sky,  threw 
a  pearl  necklace  worth  a  hundred  thousand  (gold 
pieces)  upon  the  Lord ;  and  that  pearl  necklace  no 
sooner  came  down  upon  the  head  of  the  Lord  than  it 
assumed  the  shape  of  a  tower  with  four  columns, 
regular,  well-constructed,  and  beautiful.  On  the  sum- 
mit  of  the  tower  appeared  a  couch  covered  with  many 
hundred  thousand  pieces  of  fine  cloth,  and  on  the 
couch  was  seen  the  image  of  a  Tathagata  sitting 
cross-legged.  Then  the  following  thought  presented 
itself  to  the  kingvS'ubhavyuha :  The  Buddha-knowledge 
must  be  very  powerful,  and  the  Tathagata  endowed 
with  inconceivable  good  qualities  that  this  Tathagata- 
image  shows  itself  on  the  summit  of  the  tower,  (an 
image)  so  nice,  beautiful,  possessed  of  an  extreme 
abundance  of  good  colours.  Then  the  Lord  6"aladhara- 
gar^itaghoshasusvaranakshatrara^asaiikusumitabhi- 
£'/la.,  the  Tathagata,  &c.,  addressed  the  four  classes 


^  Here  I  have  followed  Burnouf 's  reading ;  the  Cambridge  MS. 
has :  ebhir  aha?;/  Bhagavann  iyadbhir  akusalair  dharmai//  samanva- 
gato  ne/:^Mm'\  Bhagavato  'ntikaw  (sic)  upasawkramitu?«,  i.e.  being 
possessed  of  so  many  unholy  qualities,  O  Lord,  I  do  (or  did)  not 
wish  to  approach  the  Lord. 


XXV.  ANCIENT    DEVOTION.  429 

(and  asked) :  Do  you  see,  monks,  the  king  •S'ubha- 
vytiha  who,  standing  in  the  sky,  is  emitting  a  lion's 
roar  ?  They  answered  :  We  do.  Lord.  The  Lord 
proceeded :  This  king  KSubhavyuha,  monks,  after 
having  become  a  monk  under  my  rule  shall  become 
a  Tathagata  in  the  world,  by  the  name  of  ^'alendra- 
ra^a^,  endowed  with  science  and  conduct,  &c.  &c., 
in  the  world  Vistir/^avati;  his  epoch  shall  be  called 
Abhyudgatara^a.  That  Tathagata  ^'alendrara^a, 
monks,  the  Arhat,  &c.,  shall  have  an  immense  congre- 
gation of  Bodhisattvas,  an  immense  congregation  of 
disciples.  The  said  world  Vistir/^avati  shall  be  level 
as  the  palm  of  the  hand,  and  consist  of  lapis  lazuli. 
So  he  shall  be  an  inconceivably  great  Tathagata,  &c. 
Perhaps,  young  men  of  good  family,  you  will  have 
some  doubt,  uncertainty  or  misgiving  (and  think) 
that  the  king  ^'ubhavyuha  at  that  time,  that  juncture 
was  another.  But  you  must  not  think  so  ;  for  it  is 
the  very  same  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Padma^ri 
here  present,  who  at  that  time,  that  juncture  was  the 
king  ^'ubhavyuha.  Perhaps,  young  men  of  good 
family,  you  will  have  some  doubt,  uncertainty  or 
misgiving  (and  think)  that  the  queen  Vimaladatta 
at  that  time,  that  juncture  was  another.  But  you 
must  not  think  so ;  for  it  is  the  very  same  Bodhi- 
sattva Mahasattva  called  Vairo/^anara5-mipratima;/^i- 
tara^a  ^,  who  at  that  time,  that  juncture  was  the 
queen  Vimaladatta,  and  who  out  of  compassion  for 
the  king  .5"ubhavyuha  and  the  creatures  had  assumed 


^  Also  written  Salendrara^a.  In  the  Calcutta  edition  of  the 
Lalita-vistara,  p.  201, 1.  12,  he  occurs  as  Sarendrara^a,  but  Hodgson, 
Essays,  p.  33,  in  a  list  drawn  from  the  same  work,  has  Salendrarag-a. 

^  Burnoufs  reading  has  dhva^a  for  ra^a. 


430  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  XXV. 


the  state  of  being  the  wife  of  king  ^'ubhavyClha. 
Perhaps,  young  men  of  good  family,  you  will 
have  some  doubt,  uncertainty  or  misgiving  (and 
think)  that  the  two  young  princes  were  others.  But 
you  must  not  think  so ;  for  it  was  Bhaisha^ara^a 
and  Bhaisha^yara^asamudgata,  who  at  that  time, 
that  juncture  were  sons  to  the  king  ^Subhavytiha. 
With  such  inconceivable  qualities,  young  men  of 
good  family,  were  the  Bodhisattvas  Mahasattvas 
Bhaisha^yara^a  and  Bhaisha^^arafasamudgata  en- 
dowed, they,  the  two  good  men,  having  planted 
good  roots  under  many  hundred  thousand  myriads 
of  ko/is  of  Buddhas.  Those  that  shall  cherish  the 
name  of  these  two  good  men  shall  all  become 
worthy  of  receiving  homage  from  the  world,  includ- 
ing the  gods. 

While  this  chapter  on  Ancient  Devotion  was  being 
expounded,  the  spiritual  insight  of  eighty-four  thou- 
sand living  beings  in  respect  to  the  law  was  purified 
so  as  to  become  unclouded  and  spotless. 


XXVI.       ENCOURAGEMENT    OF    SAMANTABHADRA.  43 1 


CHAPTER  XXVI. 

ENCOURAGEMENT^  OF  SAMANTABHADRA. 

Thereupon  the  Bodhlsattva  Mahasattva  Saman- 
tabhadra,  in  the  east,  surrounded  and  followed  by 
Bodhisattvas  Mahasattvas  surpassing  all  calculation, 
amid  the  stirring  of  fields,  a  rain  of  lotuses,  the  play- 
ing of  hundred  thousands  of  myriads  of  ko^'is  of 
musical  instruments,  proceeded  with  the  great  pomp 
of  a  Bodhlsattva,  the  great  display  of  transformations 
proper  to  a  Bodhlsattva,  the  great  magnificence  of  a 
Bodhlsattva,  the  great  power  of  a  Bodhlsattva,  the 
great  lustre  of  a  glorious  Bodhlsattva,  the  great 
stately  march  of  a  Bodhlsattva,  the  great  miraculous 
display  of  a  Bodhlsattva,  a  great  phantasmagorical 
sight  of  gods,  Nagas,  goblins,  Gandharvas,  demons, 
Garurt'as,  Kinnaras,  great  serpents,  men,  and  beings 
not  human,  who,  produced  by  his  magic,  surrounded 
and  followed  him  ;  Samantabhadra,  then,  the  Bodhl- 
sattva, amid  such  inconceivable  miracles  worked  by 
magic,  arrived  at  this  Saha- world.  He  went  up  to 
the  place  of  the  Lord  on  the  Grzdhrakil^a,  the  king 
of  mountains,  and  on  approaching  he  humbly  saluted 
the  Lord's  feet,  made  seven  circumambulatlons  from 
left  to  right,  and  said  to  the  Lord  :  I  have  come 
hither,  O  Lord,  from   the  field  of  the  Lord  Ratna- 

'  Utsahana. 


432  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARfKA.  XXVT. 

te^obhyudgata,  the  Tathagata,  &c.,  as  I  am  aware, 
Lord,  that  here  in  the  Saha-world  is  taught  the 
Dharmaparyaya  of  the  Lotus  of  the  True  Law,  to 
hear  which  from  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  ^'akyamuni 
I  have  come  accompanied  by  these  hundred  thou- 
sands of  Bodhisattvas  Mahasattvas.  May  the  Lord 
deign  to  expound,  in  extension,  this  Dharmaparyaya 
of  the  Lotus  of  the  True  Law  to  these  Bodhisattvas 
Mahasattvas.  So  addressed,  the  Lord  said  to  the 
Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Samantabhadra :  These 
Bodhisattvas,  young  man  of  good  family,  are,  indeed, 
quick  of  understanding,  but  this  is  the  Dharmaparyaya 
of  the  Lotus  of  the  True  Law,  that  is  to  say,  an  un- 
mixed truth  ^.  The  Bodhisattvas  exclaimed  :  Indeed 
Lord  ;  indeed,  Sugata.  Then  in  order  to  confirm, 
in  the  Dharmaparyaya  of  the  Lotus  of  the  True 
Law,  the  females^  among  the  monks,  nuns,  and  lay 
devotees  assembled  at  the  gathering,  the  Lord  again 
spoke  to  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Samantabha- 
dra :  This  Dharmaparyaya  of  the  Lotus  of  the  True 
Law,  young  man  of  good  family,  shall  be  entrusted 
to  a  female  if  she  be  possessed  of  four  requisites, 
to  wit :  she  shall  stand  under  the  superintendence  of 
the  Lords  Buddhas  ;  she  shall  have  planted  good 
roots'';  she  shall  keep  steadily  to  the  mass  of  disci- 


'  Yad  utasambhinnatathata. 

"^  Tasam.  I  am  not  able  to  discover  the  connection  between 
this  confirming  of  the  females  in  the  gathering,  and  the  foregoing 
remark  on  the  character  of  the  Saddharma.  The  explanation  is 
probably  to  be  sought  in  the  term  asambhinna,  unallayed,  un- 
mixed. The  meaning  of  the  passage  may  be  that  the  Saddharma- 
pu«(/arika,  as  a  general  rule,  is  fit  for  males  only,  but  under  certain 
conditions  may  be  entrusted  to  females  also. 

^  We  would  say :  she  must  have  a  good  antecedent  behaviour. 


XXVI.      ENCOURAGEMENT    OF    SAMANTABHADRA.  433 

plinary  regulations ;  she  shall,  in  order  to  save  crea- 
tures, have  the  thoughts  fixed  on  supreme  and  perfect 
enlightenment.  These  are  the  four  requisites,  young 
man  of  good  family,  a  female  must  be  possessed  of, 
to  whom  this  Dharmaparyaya  of  the  Lotus  of  the 
True  Law  is  to  be  entrusted. 

Then  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Samantabhadra 
said  to  the  Lord :  At  the  end  of  time,  at  the  end  of 
the  period,  in  the  second  half  of  the  millennium,  I 
will  protect  the  monks  who  keep  this  Sfitranta  ; 
I  will  take  care  of  their  safety,  avert  blows  ^  and 
destroy  poison,  so  that  no  one  laying  snares  for 
those  preachers  may  surprise  them,  neither  Mara  the 
Evil  One,  nor  the  sons  of  Mara,  the  angels  called 
Marakayikas,  the  daughters  of  Mara,  the  followers 
of  Mara,  and  all  other  servitors  to  Mara ;  that  no 
gods,  goblins,  ghosts,  imps,  wizards,  spectres  laying 
snares  for  those  preachers  may  surprise  them.  In- 
cessantly and  constantly,  O  Lord,  will  I  protect  such 
a  preacher.  And  when  a  preacher  who  applies  him- 
self to  this  Dharmaparyaya  shall  take  a  walk,  then, 
O  Lord,  will  I  mount  a  white  elephant  with  six 
tusks,  and  with  a  train  of  Bodhisattvas  betake  my- 
self to  the  place  where  that  preacher  is  walking,  in 
order  to  protect  this  Dharmaparyaya.  And  when 
that  preacher,  applying  himself  to  this  Dharmapar- 
yaya, forgets,  be  it  but  a  single  word  or  syllable,  then 
will  I  mount  the  white  elephant  with  six  tusks,  show 
my  face  to  that  preacher,  and  repeat  this  entire 
Dharmaparyaya  ^.      And   when    the    preacher    has 

^  Or  punishment. 

^  Samantabhadra  renders  the  same  service  to  pious  and  studious 
preachers  as  the  Buddha  himself;  see  chapter  X,  especially  stanzas 
29-31.  As  to  the  elephant  on  which  he  is  mounted,  one  knows 
[21]  F  f 


434  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARiKA.  XXVI. 


seen  my  proper  body  and  heard  from  me  this  en- 
tire Dharmaparyaya,  he,  content,  in  high  spirits, 
ravished,  rejoiced,  joyful,  and  delighted,  will  the 
more  do  his  utmost  to  study  this  Dharmaparyiya, 
and  immediately  after  beholding  me  he  will  acquire 
meditation  and  obtain  spells,  termed  the  talisman  ^ 
of  preservation,  the  talisman  of  hundred  thousand 
ko/is,  and  the  talisman  of  skill  in  all  sounds. 

Again,  Lord,  the  monks,  nuns,  male  or  female 
lay  devotees,  who  at  the  end  of  time,  at  the  end  of 
the  period,  in  the  second  half  of  the  millennium,  shall 
study  this  Dharmaparyaya,  when  walking  for  three 
weeks,  (or)  twenty-one  days,  to  them  will  I  show  my 
body,  at  the  sight  of  which  all  beings  rejoice. 
Mounted  on  that  same  white  elephant  with  six 
tusks,  and  surrounded  by  a  troop  of  Bodhisattvas, 
I  shall  on  the  twenty-first  day  betake  myself  to  the 
place  where  the  preachers  are  walking ;  there  I  shall 
rouse,  excite,  and  stimulate  them,  and  give  them  spells 
whereby  those  preachers  shall  become  inviolable,  so 
that  no  being,  either  human  or  not  human,  shall  be 
able  to  surprise  them,  and  no  women  able  to  beguile 
them.  I  will  protect  them,  take  care  of  their  safety, 
avert  blows  2,  and  destroy  poison.  I  will,  besides, 
O  Lord,  give  those  preachers  words  of  talismanic 
spells,  such  as,  Adaw^T'e  da;zrt'apati,  da;zflfavartani 
da;z^aku5ale  da;2^asudhari  dhari  sudharapati,  bud- 
dhapa^yani  dhara;/!,  avartani  sa#2vartani  sangha- 
parikshite  sanghanirghatani  dharmapartkshite  sarva- 


that  the  Bodhisattva  entered  the  womb  of  his  mother  Maya  Devt 
in  the  shape  of  an  elephant  with  six  tusks;  see  Lalita-vistara,  p.  63. 
According  to  the  description  of  the  elephant,  it  must,  originally,  be 
a  name  of  lightning. 

^  Avarta.  '^  Or  punishment. 


XXVI.       ENCOURAGEMENT    OF    SAMANTABHADRA.  435 

sattvarutakau^alyanugate  si;;^havikri(/ite\  The  Bo- 
dhisattva  Mahasattva,  whose  organ  of  hearing  is 
struck  by  these  talismanic  words,  Lord,  shall  be 
aware  that  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva  Samanta- 
bhadra  is  their  ruling  power  2. 

Further,  Lord,  the  Bodhisattvas  Mahasattvas  to 
whom  this  Dharmaparyaya  of  the  Lotus  of  the  True 
Law  shall  be  entrusted,  as  long  as  it  continues 
having  course  in  Cambudvipa,  those  preachers, 
Lord,  should  take  this  view:  It  is  owing  to  the 
power  and  grandeur  of  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva 
Samantabhadra  that  this  Dharmaparyaya  has  been 
entrusted  to  us.  Those  creatures  who  shall  write 
and  keep  this  Sutra,  O  Lord,  are  to  partake  of 
the  course  of  duty  of  the  Bodhisattva  Mahasattva 
Samantabhadra ;  they  will  belong  to  those  who  have 
planted  good  roots  under  many  Buddhas,  O  Lord, 
and  whose  heads  are  caressed  by  the  hands  of  the 
Tathagata.  Those  who  shall  write  and  keep  this 
Sutra,  O  Lord,  will  afford  me  pleasure.  Those  who 
shall  write  this  Sutra,  O  Lord,  and  comprehend  it, 
shall,  when  they  disappear  from  this  world,  after 
having  written  it,  be  reborn  in  the  company  of  the 

^  In  BurnouPs  translation  we  find  added  :  anuvarte  vartani  vartali 
svaha.  All  terms  are,  or  ought  to  be,  vocatives  of  feminine  words  in  the 
singular.  Pati,  as  in  Pali  pa^apati,  Buddhistic  Sansk.  pra^apati, 
interchanges  with  the  ending  vati;  not  only  in  pra^avati  (e.g.  in 
Lalita-vistara),  but  in  some  of  the  words  occurring  in  the  spell ;  so 
for  da«</apati  the  Tibetan  text  has  da.nda.vzt\.  As  Siva,  in  Maha- 
bharata  XII,  10361  is  represented  as  the  personified  Danda.,  we 
may  hold  that  all  the  names  above  belong  to  diva's  female  counter- 
part, Durga.  The  epithet  of  Siwhavikri<fita  is  but  a  variation  of 
Siwhika,  one  of  the  names  of  Dakshayawi  or  Durga  in  her  quality 
of  mother  to  Rahu.    Cf.  the  remarks  on  the  spells  in  chap.  XXI. 

^  As  the  presiding  deity  of  Hghtning  he  is  also  the  lord  of  flame, 
of  Svaha,  identified  with  Dakshaya«i-Durga. 

F  f   2 


436  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  XXVI 


gods  of  paradise,  and  at  that  birth  shall  eighty-four 
thousand  heavenly  nymphs  immediately  come  near 
them.     Adorned  with  a  high  crown,  they  shall  as 
angels  dwell  amongst  those  nymphs.  Such  is  the  mass 
of  merit  resulting  from  writing  this  Dharmaparyaya; 
how  much  greater  will  be  the  mass  of  merit  reaped 
by  those  who  recite,  study,  meditate,  remember  it ! 
Therefore,  young  men  of  good  family  S  one  ought 
to  honour  this  Dharmaparyaya  of  the  Lotus  of  the 
True  Law,  and  write  it  with  the  utmost  attention. 
He  who  writes  it  with  undistracted  attention  shall 
be  supported  by  the  hands  of  a  thousand  Buddhas, 
and  at  the  moment  of  his  death  he  shall  see  another 
thousand  of  Buddhas  from  face  to  face.     He  shall 
not  sink    down   into  a  state  of  wretchedness,   and 
after  disappearing  from   this  world  he   shall   enter 
the  company  of  the  Tushita-gods,  where  the  Bodhi- 
sattva  Mahasattva  Maitreya  is  residing,  and  where, 
marked   by  the  thirty-two    sublime    characteristics, 
surrounded  by  a  host  of  Bodhisattvas,  and  waited 
upon  by  hundred  thousands  of  myriads  of  ko^is  of 
heavenly  nymphs  he  is  preaching  the  law.  Therefore, 
then,  young  men  of  good  family,  a  wise  young  man  or 
young  lady  of  good  family  should  respectfully  write 
this  Dharmaparyaya  of  the  Lotus  of  the  True  Law, 
respectfully  recite  it,  respectfully  study  it,  respect- 
fully treasure  it  up  in  his  (or  her)  mind.     By  writing, 
reciting,  studying  this  Dharmaparyaya,  and  by  trea- 
suring it  up   in   one's   mind,   young  men    of  good 
family,  one  is  to  acquire  innumerable  good  qualities. 
Hence  a  wise  young  man  or  young  lady  of  good 


^  Burnoufs  reading  has,  O  Lord.    The  reading  of  the  Cambridge 
MS.  is  no  mere  mistake,  for  we  find  it  repeated  in  the  sequel. 


XXVI.      ENCOURAGEMENT    OF    SAMANTABHADRA.  437 


family  ought  to  keep  this  Dharmaparyaya  of  the 
Lotus  of  the  True  Law.  I  myself,  O  Lord,  will  super- 
intend this  Dharmaparyaya,  that  through  my  super- 
intendence it  may  here  spread  in  (S'ambudvipa. 

Then  the  Lord  ^'akyamuni,  the  Tathagata,  &c., 
expressed  his  approval  to  the  Bodhisattva  Maha- 
sattva  Samantabhadra  :  Very  well,  very  well,  Saman- 
tabhadra.  It  is  happy  that  thou  art  so  well  disposed 
to  promote  the  weal  and  happiness  of  the  people 
at  large,  out  of  compassion  for  the  people,  for  the 
benefit,  weal,  and  happiness  of  the  great  body  of 
men  ;  that  thou  art  endowed  with  such  inconceivable 
qualities,  with  a  mind  so  full  of  compassion,  with 
intentions  so  inconceivably  kind,  so  that  of  thine 
own  accord  thou  wilt  take  those  preachers  under 
thy  protection.  The  young  men  of  good  family 
who  shall  cherish  the  name  of  the  Bodhisattva 
Mahasattva  Samantabhadra  may  be  convinced  that 
they  have  seen  vS'akyamuni,  the  Tathagata,  &c. ; 
that  they  have  heard  this  Dharmaparyaya  of  the 
Lotus  of  the  True  Law  from  the  Lord  ^'akyamuni ; 
that  they  have  paid  homage  to  the  Tathagata  ^^a- 
kyamuni ;  that  they  have  applauded  the  preaching 
of  the  Tathagata  ^'akyamuni.  They  will  have  joy- 
fully accepted  this  Dharmaparyaya;  the  Tathagata 
^'akyamuni  will  have  laid  his  hand  upon  their  head, 
and  they  will  have  decked  the  Lord  ^'akyamuni  with 
their  robes.  Those  young  men  or  young  ladies  of 
good  family,  Samantabhadra,  must  be  held  to  have 
accepted  the  command  of  the  Tathagata  \     They 

^  If  I  rightly  understand  these  cautious  and  veiled  words,  the 
meaning  is  that  such  persons,  though  no  Buddhists,  must  be  held 
in  equal  esteem  as  if  they  were.  The  persons  alluded  to  are,  not 
unlikely,  ^aiva  monks  or  devotees,  who,  if  leading  a  pious  life,  have 


438  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARiKA.  XXVI. 

will  have  no  pleasure  in  worldly  philosophy  ^-  no  per- 
sons fondly  addicted  to  poetry  will  please  them  ;  no 
dancers,  athletes,  vendors  of  meat,  mutton  butchers, 
poulterers,  pork  butchers,  or  profligates  will  please 
them.  After  having  heard,  written,  kept,  or  read  such 
Sutrantas  as  this,  they  will  find  no  delight  in  those 
persons.  They  must  be  held  to  be  possessed  of 
natural  righteousness^;  they  will  be  right-minded 
from  themselves,  possess  a  power  to  do  good  of  their 
own  accord,  and  make  an  agreeable  impression  on 
others.  Such  will  be  the  monks  who  keep  this  Su- 
tranta.  No  passionate  attachment  will  hinder  them, 
no  hatred,  no  infatuation,  no  jealousy,  no  envy,  no 
hypocrisy,  no  pride,  no  conceitedness,  no  menda- 
ciousness.  Those  preachers,  Samantabhadra,  will  be 
content  with  what  they  receive.  He,  Samanta- 
bhadra, who  at  the  end  of  time,  at  the  end  of  the 
period,  in  the  second  half  of  the  millennium,  sees  a 
monk  keeping  this  Dharmaparyaya  of  the  Lotus  of 
the  True  Law,  must  think  thus  :  This  young  man 
of  good  family  will  reach  the  terrace  of  enlighten- 
ment ;  this  young  man  will  conquer  the  troop  of  the 

for  protector  or  patron  Samantabhadra,  who,  as  we  have  seen  above, 
is  the  lord  of  Svaha  or  Dakshaya«i,  consequently  6'iva-Kala. 

^  Na  Lokayate  ru/^ir  bhavishyati.  The  Lokayatikas  are  the 
Indian  Epicureans. 

'^  Svabhavadharmasamanvagata-^,  which  may  also  be  ren- 
dered by,  possessed  of  the  religion  of  Svabhava  (Nature).  This 
I  think  to  be  the  recondite  and  real  meaning  of  the  term,  whether 
it  alludes  to  the  Svabhavika  sect  of  Buddhism  or  to  materialistic 
schools  among  the  -S'aivas.  Though  the  philosophical  tenets  of  all 
Svabhavikas  are  identical  with  those  of  the  Lokayatikas,  their 
opinions  on  morals  are  exactly  the  reverse.  Hence  it  may  have 
been  deemed  necessary  to  inculcate  on  devotees  of  more  or  less 
strong  ascetic  habits  the  precept  that  they  should  have  no  inter- 
course with  the  immoral  vulgar  materialists. 


XXVI.   ENCOURAGEMENT  OF  SAMANTABHADRA.     439 


wicked  Mara\  move  forward  the  wheel  of  the  law, 
strike  the  drum  of  the  law,  blow  the  conch  trumpet 
of  the  law,  spread  the  rain  of  the  law,  and  ascend  the 
royal  throne  of  the  law.  The  monks  who  at  the  end 
of  time,  at  the  end  of  the  period,  in  the  second  half 
of  the  millennium,  keep  this  Dharmaparyaya,  will  not 
be  covetous,  nor  greedy  of  robes  or  vehicles  ^  Those 
preachers  will  be  honest,  and  possessed  of  three  eman- 
cipations ;  they  will  refrain  from  worldly  business. 
Such  persons  as  lead  into  error  monks  who  know 
this  Sutranta,  shall  be  born  blind  ;  and  such  as  openly 
defame  them,  shall  have  a  spotted  body  in  this  very 
world.  Those  who  scoff  and  hoot  at  the  monks  who 
copy  this  Sutranta,  shall  have  the  teeth  broken  and 
separated  far  from  each  other;  disgusting  lips,  a 
flat  nose,  contorted  hands  and  feet,  squinting  eyes  ; 
a  putrid  body,  a  body  covered  with  stinking  boils, 
eruptions,  scabs,  and  itch.  If  one  speaks  an  unkind 
word,  true  or  not  true,  to  such  writers,  readers,  and 
keepers  of  this  Sutranta,  it  must  be  considered  a  very 
heinous  sin.  Therefore  then,  Samantabhadra,  people 
should,  even  from  afar,  rise  from  their  seats  before 
the  monks  who  keep  this  Dharmaparyaya  and  show 
them  the  same  reverence  as  to  the  Tathagata. 

While  this  chapter  of  the  Encouragement  of 
Samantabhadra  was  being  expounded,  hundred 
thousands  of  ko/is  of  Bodhisattvas  Mahasattvas, 
equal  to  the  sands  of  the  river  Ganges,  acquired 
the  talismanic  spell  Avarta. 


^  Marakali-^akram. 

2  Yana  ;  Burnouf  has  read  p ana,  drink.     It  is,  indeed,  generally 
impossible  to  distinguish  between  pa  and  ya  in  the  Nepalese  MSS. 


440  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARtKA.  XXVII. 


CHAPTER   XXVII. 

THE    PERIOD  ^ 

Thereupon  the  Lord  ^'akyamuni,  the  Tathagata, 
&c.,  rose  from  his  pulpit,  collected  the  Bodhlsattvas, 
took  their  right  hands  with  his  own  right  hand, 
which  had  become  strong  by  the  exercise  of  magic, 
and  spoke  on  that  occasion  as  follows  :  Into  your 
hands,  young  men  of  good  family,  I  transfer  and 
transmit,  entrust  and  deposit  this  supreme  and  per- 
fect enlightenment  arrived  at  by  me  after  hundred 
thousands  of  myriads  of  ko/is  of  incalculable  ^ons. 
Ye,  young  men  of  good  family,  do  your  best  that  it 
may  grow  and  spread. 

A  second  time,  a  third  time  the  Lord  spoke  to  the 
host  of  Bodhisattvas  after  taking  them  by  the  right 
hands  :  Into  your  hands,  young  men  of  good  family, 
I  transfer  and  transmit,  entrust  and  deposit  this 
supreme  and  perfect  enlightenment  arrived  at  by  me 
after  hundred  thousands  of  myriads  of  ko/is  of  in- 
calculable ^ons.  Receive  it,  young  men  of  good 
family,  keep,  read,  fathom,  teach,  promulgate,  and 
preach  it  to  all  beings.  I  am  not  avaricious,  young  men 
of  good  family,  nor  narrow-minded ;  I  am  confident 
and  willing  to  impart  Buddha-knowledge,  to  impart 
the  knowledge  of  the  Tathagata,  the  knowledge 
of  the   Self-born.     I  am   a   bountiful  giver,  young 

\  Dharmaparyaya,  properly,  the  period  of  the  law. 


XXVII.  THE    PERIOD.  441 

men  of  good  family,  and  ye;  young  men  of  good 
family,  follow  my  example ;  imitate  me  in  liberally 
showing  this  knowledge  of  the  Tathagata,  and  in 
skilfulness,  and  preach  this  Dharmaparyaya  to  the 
young  men  and  young  ladies  of  good  family  who 
successively  shall  gather  round  you.  And  as  to 
unbelieving  persons,  rouse  them  to  accept  this  law. 
By  so  doing,  young  men  of  good  family,  you  will 
acquit  your  debt  to  the  Tathagatas. 

So  addressed  by  the  Lord  ^'akyamuni,  the  Tatha- 
gata, &c.,  the  Bodhisattvas  filled  with  delight  and 
joy,  and  with  a  feeling  of  great  respect  they  lowered, 
bent,  and  bowed  their  body  towards  the  Lord,  and, 
the  head  inclined  and  the  joined  hands  stretched  out, 
they  spoke  in  one  voice  to  the  Lord  ^'akyamuni, 
the  Tathagata,  &c.,  the  following  words  :  We  shall 
do,  O  Lord,  what  the  Tathagata  commands ;  we 
shall  fulfil  the  command  of  all  Tathagatas.  Let  the 
Lord  be  at  ease  as  to  this,  and  perfectly  quiet.  A 
second  time,  a  third  time  the  entire  host  of  Bodhi- 
sattvas spoke  in  one  voice  the  same  words  :  Let  the 
Lord  be  at  ease  as  to  this,  and  perfectly  quiet.  We 
shall  do,  O  Lord,  what  the  Tathagata  commands  us ; 
we  shall  fulfil  the  command  of  all  Tathagatas. 

Thereupon  the  Lord  ^'akyamuni,  the  Tathagata, 
&c.,  dismissed  all  thoseTathagatas,&c.,who  had  come 
to  the  gathering  from  other  worlds,  and  wished  them 
a  happy  existence,  with  the  words :  May  the  Tatha- 
gatas, &c.,  live  happy.  Then  he  restored  the  Stupa 
of  precious  substances  of  the  Lord  Prabhutaratna, 
the  Tathagata,  &c.,  to  its  place,  and  wished  him  also 
a  happy  existence. 

Thus  spoke  the  Lord.  The  incalculable,  innume- 
rable Tathagatas,  &c.,  who   had  come  from  other 


442  SADDHARMA-PUiVDARIKA.  XXVII. 

worlds  and  were  sitting  on  their  thrones  at  the  foot 
of  jewel  trees,  as  well  as  Prabhiataratna,  the  Tatha- 
gata,  &c.,  and  the  whole  host  of  Bodhisattvas  headed 
by  Vi^'ish/a/^aritra,  the  innumerable,  incalculable 
Bodhisattvas  Mahasattvas  who  had  issued  from 
the  gaps  of  the  earth,  the  great  disciples,  the  four 
classes,  the  world,  including  gods,  men,  demons, 
and  Gandharvas,  in  ecstasy  applauded  the  words 
of  the  Lord. 


INDEX. 


Aban  Yasht,  page  253. 
Abbhutadhamma,  45. 
Abhasvaras  (pi.),  340,  346. 
Abhayandada,  412. 
Abhi^;7a,  i,  89,  131,  242. 
Abhi^;7ai§-;7anabhibhu.     See    Maha- 

bhi^;7a^;7anabhibhu. 
Abhirati,  177. 
Abhisawskara,  317. 
Abhyudgatar%a,  429. 
Adbhutadharma,  45. 
Aditi,  124,  371. 
Aditta-pariyaya,  79. 
A^atajatru,  6. 
A^ita,  18  seq.,  290  seqq.,  311,  316 

seq.,  320  seqq. 
A^ivaka,  263. 
A^«ata-KauWinya,   2,  34,  56,  198, 

202. 
Agrajravaka,  2. 
A^ala,  374. 

Akanishz/^as  (pi.),  340. 
Akajapratish^/^ita,  178. 
Akshayamati,  4,  406,  412  seq. 
Akshobhya,  177. 
Alahkarajubha,  420. 
Alahkarasura,  420. 
Amitabha,  178,  389,  417. 
Amitayus,  178,  389,  417. 
Amoghadarjin,  4. 
Anabhibhu,  183. 
Anagamin,  315,  330,  387. 
Ananda,  3,  205  seqq. 
Ananda-Bhadra,  207. 
Ananta>^aritra,  284. 
Anantamati,  19. 
Anantavikramin,  4. 
Anavanamitavai^ayanta,  206. 
Anavanata  Vai^ayanti,  206. 
Anavatapta,  5. 
Anikshiptadhura,  4. 
Anilambha,  394. 
Anisawsa,  336. 
Anrisa.msa,  336. 
Anupadhijesha,  139. 
Anupadisesa,  139. 


Anupamamati,  4. 

Anutpattikadharmakshanti,  134,  254. 

Anuvya;7^ana,  246. 

Anya,  371. 

Apastamba,  48. 

ApkWtsna,  394. 

Apokasiwa,  394. 

Appama;7;7a,  140. 

Apra«ihita,  99. 

Apratyanika,  94. 

Apratyaniya,  94. 

Ara;7;7akanga,  293. 

Ara«yadhuta,  293. 

Ardvi  Sura,  253. 

Arhat  (of  the  Buddhists),  i,  8,  35, 

and  further  passim. 
Arhat  (of  the  Gainas),  265. 
Arupabrahmaloka,  241. 
Arya,  i3>^79,  81,  275,  338. 
Aryasatyani.     See  Truths. 
Ajaiksha,  71. 
Asamasama,  418. 
Asaiikhyeya,  284,  329,  331. 
Ajaya,  317. 

Asekha.     See  Ajaiksha. 
Ajoka,  383. 
Ajva^it,  2. 
Ajvins,  67  seq. 
Atikrantabhavaniya,  387, 
Aupapaduka,  160. 
Avabhasa,  142. 
Avalokitejvara,  4,  406  seqq. 
Avarta,  439. 
Avewika-dharma,  31. 
Avidya,  133. 
AvUi,  7,  10,  92,  337,  340,  350,  360. 

Bala,  79. 

Beal  (S.),  228,  406,  414. 
Benares,  56,  70. 
Bhadra  (a  world),  258. 
Bhadrakalpa,  193. 
Bhadrapala,  4,  360. 
Bhadravargiya,  2. 
Bhadrika,  2. 
Bhagavata-Pura«a,  118. 


444 


SADDHARMA-PU.VDARIKA. 


Bhaisha^yara^-a,  4,  213  seqq.,    255, 
371  seqq.,  385,  392,   394,  404, 

43°- 
Bhaisha^yarag-asamudgata,  394,  430. 
Bharadva^a,  19. 
Bharadvag'a,  2. 
Bharhut  (Stupa  of),  345. 
Bhavana,  140. 
Bhavani,  371. 

Bhishmagar^g-itasvarara^a,  354  seqq. 
Bhishmasvara,  360. 
Bigandet  (P.),  55,  421. 
Birth  Stories,  2.     See  Gataka. 
Bodhapakshika.    SeeBodhipakshika. 
Bodhi  (constituents  of).    See  Bodh- 

yafiga. 
Bodhimaw^a,  155. 
Bodhipakshika,  420. 
Bodhisattva,  4,  and  further  passim. 
Bodhi  tree,  300. 
Bodhyahga,  31. 
Brahma  (Sahampati),  5,  55,  69,  252, 

347,  349,  387,  416. 
Brahmadhva^a,  178. 
Brahma,^akra,  134. 
Brahmakaya  ( =  Brahmakayika),  345. 
Brahmakayika,  5,  156,  342,  347,  387. 
Brahmaloka.    See  Brahma-world. 
Brahmas  (pi.,  divine  beings),  21,  64, 

"5,  345- 
Brahmasawstha,  63. 
Brahma-Sutra,  63,  322  seq. 
Brahmavadini,  336. 
Brahmavihara,  140. 
Brahma-world,  160,  241,   315,   322 

seq.,  340,  364,  387. 
Brihaspati,  411. 
Br/'hat-Sawhita,  76,  179. 
Buddha,  16,  and  further  passim. 
Buddhadharma,  31. 
Buddha-field,  7  seqq.,  145,  194,  211, 

&c. 
Buddhaghosha,  241. 
Buddha-vehicle,  11,  42  seq.,  89,  129, 

137. 

Buhler  (G.),  48. 

Burnouf  (Eug.),  2,  and  further  pas- 
sim. 

Childers  (R.  C),   31,  71,  132,  241, 

325. 
Cunningham  (A.),  345. 

Dakshayam,  435. 
Da«c/a,  435. 
Da«<^apati,  435. 


Da«^avati,  435. 

Dajabala,  31. 

Dajajila,  269. 

Devadatta,  246  seq. 

Devanikaya,  342. 

Devara^a,  247. 

Devasopana,  247. 

Dhammakkhandha.     See    Dharma- 

skandha. 
Dhammapada,  58,  99. 
Dhanvantari,  404. 
DharawT,  311,  314. 
Dharamdhara,  4. 
Dharamndhara,  4,  418. 
Dharma,  56,  245  seq. 
Dharmabhawaka,  336. 
Dharmadhara,  5. 

Dharmagahanabhyudgatara^a,  2c8. 
Dharmalokamukha,  420. 
Dharmamati,  19. 
Dharmaparyaya,  6,  17,  20  seqq.,  65, 

120,  &c. 
Dharmaprabhasa,  195  seqq. 
Dharmara^a,  58,  91,  115, 122,  307. 
Dharmasa;7^iti,  272. 
Dharmaskandha,  241. 
Dharmika,  245. 
Dhatu,  251,  399. 
Dhr/tarash/ra,  4. 
Dhr/tiparipur«a,  67. 
Dhutaguwa,  132. 
Dhutahga,  132,  193. 
Dhva^agrakeyura,  393. 
Dhyani-bodhisattva,  134, 
Dhyani-buddha,  134,  411,  417. 
Dipankara,  22,  28,  300. 
Dipavawsa,  241,  260,  281,  383. 
Dr/shdguru,  407. 
Druma,  5. 

Dundubhijvarara^a,  358. 
Durga,  256,  371,  435. 

Eka^akra,  81. 
Ekapad,  81. 

Fausboll  (V.),  45,  48. 

Gadgadasvara,  393  seqq. 
Gandharva,    5,  7,    20,    23,    69,  and 

further  passim. 
Gandharvakayika,  5. 
Garu^a,    6  seq.,    20,    69,    162,    and 

further  passim. 
Gatha,  45. 
Gauri,  373. 
Gautami,  3,  256  seqq. 


INDEX. 


445 


Gavampati,  2. 
Gaya,  294,  296,  299. 
Gayajirsha,  79. 
Geya,  45. 
Ghoshamati,  19. 
Giantesses  (island  of),  407, 
Goldstiicker  (Th.),  134. 
Gr/dhraku/a,  i,  235,   248  seq.,  307 

seq.,  321,  396,  398,  431. 
Guhagupta,  4. 

Galadharagar^itaghoshasusvaranak- 
shatrara^asahkusumitabhi^wa, 
419  seqq. 

Gambudvipa,  214  seq.,  329,  391,  435, 

437. 
Gambunadaprabhasa,  148  seq. 

Gataka,  45,  48,  392. 

Gina,  8,  12  seqq.,   23,  and  further 

passim. 
Givanmukta,  135. 
Givanmukti,  138. 
C^Ianakara,  157. 
Gwanamudra,  394. 
Gwanolka,  394. 
Gyotishprabha,  5. 

Haradatta,  48. 

Hardy  (R.  Spence),  2,  31,  79,  246, 

^  ^348,  394  seq.,  402,  420. 
Hariti,  374. 

Himalaya,  130,  137,  351. 
Hiouen  Thsang,  59,  260. 
Hodgson  (B.  H.),  30,  186,  241,  269, 
321,  429. 

Indra,  55,  252,  342,  387,  &c. 
Indradatta,  4. 
Indradhva^a,  178. 
Indras  (pi.),  315,  347. 
Indriya,  79. 

tjvara,  4,  55,  116,  349,  411. 
Itivr/ttika,  45. 
Itivuttaka,  45. 
Ityukta,  45. 

Julien  (Stanislas),  62. 

Kala,  198. 

Kala-mountain,  233  seq.,  386. 

Kalodayin,  198. 

Kalpa  (al.  JEon),  89,  284;  interme- 
diate kalpa,  27,67  seq.,  148,  &c. 

Kamaladalavimalanakshatrara^asah- 
kusumitabhi^;7a,  393  seq. 

Kawphilla.     See  Kapphiwa. 


Kapilavastu,  294,  296. 
Kapina,  2,  198. 
Kapphilla,  2,  198. 
Kapphiwa,  2, 198. 
Karaw^a-vyuha,  407,  416. 
Karketana,  50. 
Karma/aya,  317. 
Kashayas  (the  five),  58. 
Kashphiwa.     See  Kapphi«a. 
Kasphiwa.     See  Kapphiwa. 
Kajyapa.     See  Maha-Kajyapa. 
Kajyapa  of  Gaya,  2,  198. 
Kajyapa  of  Nadi,  2,  198. 
Kajyapa  of  Uruvilva,  2,  198. 
Ka/asi,  48. 
Ka^asiva^d'/^ano,  48. 
Katba.  Upanishad,  122. 
Katyayana.     See  Maha-Katyayana. 
KauWinya.  See  A^«ata-Kau«^inya. 
Kaush^Aila.     See  Maha-Kaush/^ila. 
Kejini,  374. 
Ketu,  211  seq. 

Kharaskandha  (al.  Suraskandha),  6. 
Kinnara,  7,  20,  33,  69,  and  further 

passim. 
Kinnara  king,  5. 
Kleja,  58. 
Klejakashaya,  42. 
Kot\,  3,  and  further  passim. 
Kotthlta.     See  Maha-Ko/^Aita. 
Kr/ttikas  (the  Pleiads),  256  seq. 
Kubera,  411. 
Kumara,  256. 
Kumarabhuta,  4. 
Kumara^iva,  62. 
KumbhaWa,  373. 
KuWina  (family),  199. 
Kunti,  374  seq. 
Ku/adantT,  374. 
KQ/agara,  321. 

ATailaka,  186. 
^ailakabhuta,  186. 
ATakravala,  233. 

^akravartin,  157,  174,  252,  332,411. 
Kanda.\\,  A'aWalika,  373. 
Sandra,  4. 
/iTandraprabha,  394. 
ATandraprabhasvararag-a,  358. 
/Tandrapradipa  (  =  ^andrasuryapra- 
dipa),  26  ;  name  of  a  Samadhi, 

394- 
ATandrarkadipa,  25  seq. 
ATandrasiiryapradipa,  18  seq. 
iTandravimalasuryaprabhasajri,    376 

seqq. 


SADDH  ARMA-PUA^DAr!kA. 


ATaraka,  263. 

A'ellakabhuta.     See  ATailaka. 
^elukabhfita.     See  Ai'ailaka. 
A7jandogya  Upanishad,  320. 
^itradhva^a,  413. 
A'ittavimukti,  31. 
jSTulIavagga,  2,  47  seq.,  198,  268. 
Kunda,  198. 

Lakshmi,  251. 

Lalita-vistara,  3,  17,  55,  58,  70,  79, 

110,140,156,  191,316,348,392, 

418,  420,  429. 
Lamba,  373. 
Lay  ana,  222. 
Lohitamukti,  147. 
Lokabandhu,  166,  210. 
Lokadhatu,  177. 
Lokayatamantradharaka,  263. 
Lokayatika,  263,  438. 
Lotus  of  the  True  Law,  21  seq.,  65, 

174  seq.,  177,  228   seqq.,   357, 

366,   370,   377,   386  seqq.,  432 

seqq. 

Madhubhumika,  387. 

Madhura,  5. 

Madhurasvara,  5. 

Magadha,  6. 

Mahabharata,  170,  256,  435. 

Mahabhi^?7a§-;7anabhibhu,  153  seqq,, 

183. 
Mahabrahmas  (pi.),  342. 
Mahadharma,  5. 
Mahakalpa,  381. 
Maha-Kajyapa,  2,  98,  108,  113,  118 

seqq.,  142  seqq. 
Maha-Katyayana,  2,  98, 144, 147  seq. 
Maha-Kaush//6ila,  2. 
Mahakaya,  6. 
Maha-Ko//>6ita,  2. 
Maha-ATunda,  198. 
Maha-Maudgalyayana,    2,    98,   144, 

149. 
Maha-Maya,    5,    124.      Cf.    Maya 

Devi. 
Maha-Mu/Jilinda,  233. 
Mahanaman,  2. 
Mahananda,  2. 
Mahapra^apati,  3. 
Mahapratibhana,  4,  228  seqq.,  255. 
Mahapur«a,  6. 
Maharatnapratimaw^ita,  66. 
Maharddhiprapta,  6, 
Maharupa,  153. 
Mahasambhava,  354. 


Mahasanghika,  228. 

Mahasattva,  4,  and  further  passim. 

Mahasthamaprapta,  4,  354  seq. 

Mahate^as,  6. 

Mahate^ogarbha,  420. 

Mahavagga,  2  seq.,  55,  70,  79,156, 

198. 
Mahavastu,  5. 
Mahavikramin,  4. 
Mahavyuha,  142. 
Mahejvara,  4,  55, 116,  349,  411. 
Maitrayawiputra.     See  Pur«a. 
Maitreya,  4  seq.,  28,  286  seq.,  290 

seqq.,  311,  314,  316,  328  seqq., 

436. 
Makuifadanti,  374. 
Maladhari,  374. 
Manasvin,  5. 
Mandara,  308. 
Mandarava,  6,  9,  20,  24,  69,    228, 

234,  313,  342,  345,  378. 

Ma%ughosha  (  =  Ma%ujri),  11,  15, 
280. 

Ma%usha,  6,  9,  20,  342,  345. 

Ma^^ushaka,  6,  9,  20,  342,  345, 

Ma%ujri,  4,  8  seqq.,  23,  248  seqq., 
262  seqq.,  363,  394  seqq. 

Ma;;§-usvara  (  =  Ma%um),  16. 

Manobhirama,  150. 

Mano^;7a,  5. 

Mano^;7ajabdabhigar^ita,  206. 

Mano^wasvara,  5. 

Manu  (law  book),  191,  317. 

Manus  (pi.),  193. 

Manushi-Buddha,  193. 

Mara,  63  seq.,  143,  155,  275,  391 
seq.,  433,  439. 

Marakayika,  391,  433. 

Maras  (pi.  divine  beings),  21,64,115. 

Marut,  55. 

Matangi,  373. 

Mati,  22. 

Matres  (the  seven),  256. 

Mamta^andT,  374. 

Maudgalyayana.  See  Maha-Maud- 
galyayana. 

Maya  (Devi),  5,  371,  434. 

Meghadundubhisvarara^a,  399  seq. 

Meghasvara,  179. 

Meghasvarapradipa,  179. 

Meghasvarara^g-a,  179,  358. 

Meru,  5,  337,  350  seq.,  414. 

Merukalpa,  178. 

Meruku^a,  178. 

Milinda  Pawho,  132, 153. 

Mithra,  17  seq.,  28. 


INDEX. 


447 


Mu/^ilinda,  233. 
Muller  (Max),  59,  317. 
MuWaka  Upanishad,  131. 
Musaragalva,  147. 

Naga,  5,  20,  24,  69,  162,  213,  223, 
253,  338  seq.,  347,  349,  363,  376, 
391,  412  seq.,  415,  431. 

Naga  king,  5,  248,  251  seq. 

Na^iketas,  122. 

Nakshatrara^a,  4. 

Nakshatrara^aditya,  420. 

Nakshatrarag-asankusumitabhi^;7a, 

37,  376  seqq.,  394. 
Nakshatrara^avikrWita,  393. 
Nakshatratarara^aditya,  420. 
N  anda  (a  N  aga  king) ,  5 ;  (an  Arhat) ,  2 . 
Naradatta,  4. 
Narayawa,  397. 
Nayuta,  3. 
Niramisha,  191. 
Nirgrantha,  263. 

Nirvawa,  18,  21,  and  further  passim. 
Nityaparivr/ta,  178. 
Nityodyukta,  4. 

Oldenberg  (H.),  2,  241. 
Opapatika,  160. 

Padmaprabha,  65  seqq. 

PadmajrT,  4,  399  seq.,  405. 

Padmavr/shabhavikramin,  67. 

PaWita,  209,  318. 

Pawini,  25,  53,  113,144?  153- 

Pa«>^avaggiya,  2. 

Paramita,  18, 140,  243,  246,  249,  252, 

316,  355,419- 

Par^anya,  1 1 9, 

Pari^araka,  209. 

Parinirmita  Va^avartin,  225. 

Parivrag",  Parivrajaka,  63,  263. 

Paryaya  (  =  Dharmaparyaya),  255, 
277. 

Pa^isallana,  175. 

Pa/isambhida,  192. 

Perfections  (the  six).  See  Para- 
mita. 

Phoenix,  378  seqq. 

Pilindavatsa,  2. 

Piwd'ola  (Bharadvag-a),  2. 

Pitn-worship,  115. 

Prabhasa  ( =  Samantaprabhasa),  199. 

Prabhutaratna,  229  seqq.,  283,  313, 
364  seqq.,  392,  397  seqq.,  412, 
442.  ^ 

Pradanajura,  4,  372,  394,  404. 


Pra^apati,  435. 
Pra^avati,  435, 
Tragna,  30,  307,  37 1- 
Pra^;/a^yotis,  387. 
Pra^77akuifa,  248  seqq. 
Pra^;7ika,  30. 
Prakn'ti,  124. 
Pralamba,  373. 
Prawayama,  402. 
Prawidhana,  203,  208. 
Prasadavati,  394. 
Prathamakalpika,  387. 
Pratirupaka,  68. 
Pratisawlayana,  175. 
Pratisawvid,  192. 
Pratityasamutpada,  133;  cf.  172. 
Pratyekabuddha,  10,  30,  33,  36,  &c. 
Pratyeka^ina,  137. 
Priyadarjana  (an  ^on),  400,  419. 
Puwyabhisawskara,  317. 
Purwa    (Maitrayamputra),    3,    191 

seqq. 
Purwa^^andra,  4. 
Purushottama,  44,  46. 
Purva-yoga,  153,  376,  419. 
Pushpadanti,  374. 

Rag-agr/ha,  i. 

Rahu,  6,  210  seq.,  395. 

Rahula,  3,  205,  209  seq.,  257. 

Rahula-Bhadra  (  =  Rahula),  209. 

Rajmiprabhasa,  142  seq, 

Rajmijatasahasraparipur«adhva^a, 

257. 
Ratipratipurwa,  150. 
Ratna  (a  term  applied  to  Bodhisat- 

tvas),  66. 
Ratnadatta,  4. 
Ratna^andra,  4. 
Ratnakara,  4. 
Ratnaketur%a,  211. 
Ratnamati,  19. 
Ratnapa«i,  4. 
Ratnaprabha,  4. 
Ratnaprabhasa   (al.   Ratnavabhasa), 

145. 
Ratnas  (the  seven),  227. 
Ratnasambhava,  145. 
Ratnate^obhyudgata,  432. 
Ratnavabhasa.    See  Ratnaprabhasa. 
Ratnavijuddha,  229. 
Revata,  2, 

Rhys  Davids  (T.W.),  2,  45,  392. 
Rig-veda,  66,  8r,  309,  404. 
Rudra,  401,  404. 
Rupabrahmaloka,  241. 


448 


SADDHARMA-PUiVJDARiKA. 


i?/ddhi,  19,  273. 
iJ/ddhivikrWita,  394. 
J?/shipatana,  70. 

Sadaparibhuta,  356  seqq. 
Saddharma-puw^arika.     See  Lotus. 

Name  of  a  Samadhi,  393. 
Sagara,    5,    248,    251    seqq,  ;     his 

daughter,  251  seqq. 
Sagarabuddhidharin  Abhi^waprapta, 

207. 
SagaravaradharabuddhivikrWitabhi- 

gn?i,  206,  209  seqq. 
Sagata.     See  Svagata. 
Sahampati.     See  Brahma. 
Saha-world,    230   seqq.,    256,    and 

further  passim. 
Samantabhadra,  431  seqq. 
Samantagandha,  4. 
Samantamukha,  406, 
Samantaprabha  ( =  Samantaprabha- 

sa),  200. 
Samantaprabhasa,  198  seqq. 
Sambhava,  153. 
Sawskara,  107,  133. 
Sandhabhashita,  30,  59;  cf.  62,  121, 

261,  273,  320. 
Sandhabhashya,  30,  59;  cf.  62,  121, 

261,  273,  320. 
Sandhayabiiashita,    30,    59 ;    cf.   62, 

121,  261,  273,  320, 
Sahgamejvara,  309. 
Safigha,  56. 

Sahgraha(-vastuni),  140. 
Saptaratnapadmavikramin  (al.  Sapta- 

ratnapadmavikrantagamin),  209. 
Sarvabuddhasandarjana,  400. 
Sarvadarjana-Sahgraha,  402. 
Sarvaguwaiahkaravyuha,  425. 
Sarvalokabhaya^ita-^/^^ambhitatvavi- 

dhvawsanakara,  179. 
Sarvalokabhayagitastambhitatvavi- 

dhvawsanakara,  179. 
Sarvalokadhatupadravodvegapraty- 

uttu-«a,  178. 
Sarvapuwyasamu^/^aya,  394. 
Sarvarthanaman,  4. 
Sarvarupasandarjana,  378,  384,  404. 
Sarvarutakaujalya,  394. 
Sarvasattvapapa^ahana,  424. 
Sarvasattvapriyadarjana,    257,     377 

seqq. 
Sarvasattvatratri,  161. 
Sarvasattvoifohari,  374. 
Satatasamitabhiyukta,  4,  336  seqq. 
Satpurusha,  402. 


Schiefner  (A.),  89, 

Sekho,  71. 

Senapati,  411. 

Senart  (E.),  5,  227,  230,  348, 

Siwha,  4. 

Siwhadhva^a,  178. 

Siwhaghosha,  178. 

Siwha^andra,  360. 

Si;whavikrWita,  435, 

Siwhika,  435. 

Skanda,  256,  411. 

Sopadhijesha,  138. 

Srotaapanna,  315,  330,  387. 

Stupa,  8,  15,  277  seqq.,  &c. 

Subhuti,  2,  98,  144  seqq. 

Sudharma  (a  king  of  the  Kinnaras), 
5;  an  angel,  169. 

Sudharma,  167,  342,  345. 

Sugata,  10,  and  further  passim. 

Su^ata,  296. 

Sugata^etana,  360. 

Sukhakara,  417, 

Sukhavati,  178,  389,  417. 

Sukhavati-vyuha,  317. 

Sumati,  19. 

Sumeru,  5,  162,  169,  233,  267,  337, 
350  seq.,  386. 

Sunanda,  3. 

Sundara-Nanda,  3. 

Supratish/^ita/^aritra,  284. 

Suraskandha,  6  ;  cf.  Kharaskandha. 

Suryagarbha,  4. 

Suryavarta,  394. 

Susawsthita,  4. 

Susarthavaha,  4. 

Sutra,  24,  29,  46,  and  further  pas- 
sim. 

Sutranta,  65, 144, 176,  218,  &c. 

Sutta,  45. 

Suvikrantavikramin,  4. 

Suvijuddha,  195,  197. 

Svabhavika,  438. 

Svagata,  198. 

Svaha,  435. 

Svastika,  392. 

Svayambhu,  310. 

Svayambhu^;7ana,  217. 

5akra,  4. 

5akyamuni,  179,  228,  232,  234  seqq., 
283  seq.,  298,  and  further  pas- 
sim. 

5akyaputra,  3. 

Sakyasiwha,  28. 

5ala  king,  417. 

5alendraraja,  429. 


INDEX. 


449 


4S'aWilyavidya,  320. 

i'ahkara  (the  philosopher),  63,  134. 

iSankhajila,  11. 

5ari  (son  of )  =  ^ariputra,  47  seq.,  56, 

69. 
5ariputra,  2,  30  seqq.,  252  seqq. 
Sajiketu,  145. 
iSatapatlia-Brahmawa,  386. 
5ayyasana,  308. 
5ikhin   (name  of  Brahma),  5,  179; 

name  of  an  angel,  167. 
5iva,  5,  81,115,  407,  435. 
5rama«era,  292. 
^ravaka,  129. 
■Sravaka-yana,  269. 
5rigarbha,  22,  27. 
■Subhavyuha,  419  seqq. 
■Siinyata,  127  ;  cf.  99. 
iSvetajvatara  Upanishad,  134. 

Tadi  (tad in),  25. 
Taittiriya  Arawyaka,  314. 
Tamalapatra/Jandanagandha,  150  seq. 
Tamalapatra/^andanagandhabhi^wa, 

178. 
Tapin,  25. 

TA       A        »Tr' A  t     A 

ara,  Taraka,  251,  253. 

Tathagata,   9,   12,   17,  and   further 

passim. 
Tathagatas  (the  sixteen),  178. 
Tayin,  25,  45,  57,  113,  i44,  169,  199, 

207,  209,  287,  315. 
Tirtha-doctrine,  260. 
Tirthika,  63,  259  seq.,  265. 
Tishter  Yasht,  253. 
Tishtrya,  253. 
Tishya  (  =  Upatishya),  89. 
Trailokavikramin,  4. 
Trayastriwja  (gods),  156. 
Trenckner  (V.},  132. 
Trinabhi,  81. 
Tripad,  81. 
Trivartman,  134. 
Trivr/t,  134. 
Truths  (the  four  great),  18,  90,  158, 

354- 
Tushita  gods,  436. 

Udana,  45. 

Upadana,  172. 

Upadisesa,  138. 

Upananda  (an  Arhat),  3;  a  Naga,  5. 

Upanisa,  317. 

Upasthayaka,  209. 

Upatishya,  89. 

Upaya,  30  ;  cf.  307. 

[21]  ( 


Upayakaujalya,  30,  59. 
Ur«a,  427. 
Utpalaka,  5. 
Uttaramati,  4. 

Va^^ipiittaka,  260. 
Va^ra-A^arya,  269. 
Va^ra^/f/jedika,  59. 
Va^rapawi,  411. 
VaidehT,  6. 
Vai^ayanta,  342,  345. 
Vaihayasa,  227. 
Vaipulya,  45. 
VairOi^anarajmipratimaWita,     393, 

.  ^396  seq.,  419,  429. 
Vaijaradya,  246. 
Vaijravawa,  4,  373. 
Vaivasvata,  309. 
Vaiyakarawa,  45. 
Vakkula,  2,  198. 
Vakula,  2,  198. 
Vandya,  318. 
Varaha-Mihira,  76. 
Varaprabha,  21  seq.,  26  seq. 
Vardhamanamati,  4, 
Varuwadatta,  4. 
Vashpa,  2. 
Vajibhuta,  i, 
Vasuki,  5. 
Vayu,  397,  401  seq. 
Vedalla,  45. 
Vedanta,  322. 

Vehicles  (the  three),  78  seqq.,  213. 
Vema^itri,  6. 
Vepa^itti,  6. 
Veyyakarawa,  45. 
Vihara,  222. 
Vikurva,  406. 
Vimala,  253  seq. ;  name  of  a  Sama- 

dhi,  420. 
Vimalabhasa,  420. 
Vimaladatta,  380  ;  name  of  a  Sama- 

dhi,  39J. 
Vimaladatta,  419  seqq. 
Vimalagarbha  (a  prince),  419  seqq.; 

name  of  a  Samadhi,  394. 
Vimalagranetra,  27. 
Vimalanetra,  22,  419  seqq. 
Vimalanirbhasa,  420. 
Vimalaprabha,  394. 
Vimatisamudghatin,  19. 
Vimoksha,  31. 
Vimukti,  31. 
Vinirbhoga,  355. 
Vipajyin,  193. 
Vipra^itti,  6. 

g 


450 


SADDHARMA-PUiVDARlKA. 


Vipratyanika,  vipratyaniyaka,  17. 

Virata,  66,  68. 

Yirudbaka,  4,  373. 

Virupaksha,  4. 

Vijeshamati,  4, 19. 

Vish«u,  5,  44,  81,  173,  301,  397,4"- 

Vijish^aMritra,  284,   364,  367,  394, 

^442. 
Vistirwavati,  429. 
Vijuddha^aritra,  284. 
Vijvanatha,  309. 
Vyuha,  173. 

Vyuhara^a    (a    Bodhisattva),    394 ; 
name  of  a  Samadhi,  394. 


Westergaard  (N.  L.),  253. 

Ya^wavalkya,  141. 

Yama,  65  seq.,  91,  115    seq.,  167, 

178,  233,  248,   309,  402,    415, 

417. 
Yana,  34,  53- 
Yajaskama,  23,  28. 
Yajodhara,  3,  257  seq. 
Yoga,  7. 

Yogajastra,  31,  71,  i40»  3^7}  402. 
Yoga  system,  31,  71,  387. 
Yogayatra,  170. 
Yogin,  7,  92,  319. 


TRANSLITERATION    OF    ORIENTAL    ALPHABETS. 


451 


n  n  '^  '~i  ri. 


n  5i  c  ^  t 


D 


"D 


«   —    jJoJi^ 


tJ(X. 


D 


-    UoJ-i) 


iS 


u  ^ 


«N  q    *1  <>J 


3 


«^^  ^oj 


Q^ 


sJ     • 


|g    IJ    fi-    pr 


K)     ^e' 


Ijr  iss  nr  P^  ir 


H 
Z 

< 

•z, 

o 

z 

o 
u 


=^  "1.  's 


be 


bc 


be 
c 


-fl    ^ 


CO 
Q 

c3 


■4J 


c3 


3 


•73 


03       O 

u 

o 


a, 

72 


© 

03 


»s   rs 


3 
.03 


M 

00 

|3 

05 

d 

-u 

•r-l 

f1 

rt 

0 

ed 

•d 

4-t 

0 

0 

a 

m 

<!:» 

C 

CO 

G 

03 

0 

«4 


c3 


O 

<£ 

1—1 
aJ 
& 


as 


SA 


C     03 


S3 


"ir. 


•X    t- 


Gg-    2 


452 


TRANSLITERATION    OF    ORIENTAL   ALPHABETS 


<l 

•               e              • 

•           • 

•        • 

^      • 

>» 

• 

•     *» 

-    :=     .     . 

•        • 

C     — 

•      m       .      N     *"      • 

*: 

o 

.               .             "^      . 

<J 

i 

•      • 

• 

• 

^ 

^ 

•      • 

c;  q    •  r 

r    . 

ri  J% 

•  .D   D   —   ti     • 

X 

*      • 

» 

• 

rabic. 

'O. 

'S  ' 

D     1  0    " 

• 

D-O 

:  5  •  -^  "b  • 

^            1 

• 

• 

:2  :s  ^-^ 

(4 

'2 

^. 

'\<^ 

D     •  0   " 

.  ,n 

D-O 

0. 

o 

•  5    •  •-> 

, 

— 

<^ 

:p^ 

^       •       •      c^      .       .  - 

---^ 

:  J)  :^  .  : 

a, 

"          • 

r^ 

■o 

init. 

:  ?^ 

.Tk      "N-*,          • 

• 

• 

IxJ 

8-   \2     ,    *T\<ir 

• 
• 

I  ^  .  ^  .  . 

u 

% 

• 

tr 

•  ^  • 

|c    fr      .    hr 

• 

fr  IS  K 

.  fr     .     .     .     . 

n 
< 

X 

U 

•  •     •           • 

•  •     •           • 

•  •     •           • 

•  • 

.     Q       . 

•  • 

• 
• 
• 
• 

< 

^ 

. 

• 

.           .           . 

• 

"Si'Ss     ««      H 

• 

•                      •                      • 

• 

■** 

^*-'      N— ^ 

< 

z 

"^ 

■yi 

<« 

•        •        *        * 

• 

S 

1 

>k 

•        •        •        • 

• 

^    • 

c   -- 

.        DO           •        N          .          • 

a             •             •             • 

•            •            • 

•     • 

•          ••••• 

•            •             •            • 

•           ••»•• 

•          •        CO        0} 



*     •    S    M 

•      f-l      M 

1! 

2   8 

o  - 

'c3 

"eg 

4-1 

:il 

•  a.  'S 

•  to       (» 

•    a,  •» 

,      ai      en 

at 

-3   ^   cv.     •   •§   1 

S     53     S    .2     S     « 

"     2     43     S     2 

i 

o 

> 

a 

01 

3 

:5    s    s    s 

72 

"               03      c3 

.2 

S      03 

05        O 

J   - 

* 

^•"S     J    5    :^    - 

oo 

O^      O      -H      W 

CO    Tf«    »o    « 

3     t-     00 

<T>     O 

1—i 

CM    CO    Tf<    lo    cs    ^* 

I 

.-^ 

i-H     (M     (M     IM 

<M     Cfl     (M     C 

d     (M     IM 

(M     CO 

CO 

CO    eo    CO    CO    CO    e*3 

FOR    THE    SACRED    BOOKS    OF    THE    EAST. 


45. 


n    . 


j>  ^ 


•^ 


.   ^ 


-N 


a  c\  r\  n 


n 


-a  ^ 


o 


6  B 


ci 

d 


:  :^- 


]^- 


1 


-^ 


^ 


1 


^ 


c/ 


^ 


s- 


♦s 


^ 


«J> 


^ 


fo    to    |w    h?    5^    ^^ 


P-  t?  fy  » 


:S   -^   =§ 


P*l?    ^: 


e  ^ 


^     J3 
05      ea 


^  "c-  -^    5 


o3    .t: 


2         ^    > 


03 


a3      <n 


C/3 


O 

•r-l 


Hi 


'S. 


s   &  I  «- 


m 


c 


-a 


3 
C 


c3 
O 

CO 


3 


a, 


<o3 

r.     m 

-     3 

C 


to 

OS 

CO 


CO      CO      Tj^      ^      ^      ^      ^      '^      ^      ^J* 


00050'-H<MeO'*lOCr)t^0005 


454 


TRANSLITERATION    OF    ORIENTAL    ALPHABETS. 


Chinese. 



•                                           ••••                                                   -.••••••• 

•        •                                           «•••                                           •••                          •••■••• 

•       •       •       1        ^       •  *-    * •*  /r      :•       :       •       •       '     k    ''~       ' 

«•                                      •■••                                      •••                       ■■••••• 

Arabic. 

•     •    • 

:  :  <  ^  .  ij. :  :  :  :.  .j^  :  :>i^  :  :  :  :;!^  :  :  :  :  :  : 

•     •                          •••■                ••           ••••          •••••• 

Persian. 

•    •  *   ^   ^   B=  •    •    •    —  -i,  •    -'b  •    •    •    '»i.  •    •    •    •    •    ■ 

- 

.J 

> 

V 

0- 

• 
« 

•  c    ti           

•  cd.S^'O ^^      .    ^     .     .     .     .  .^ 

•  —    :»          

i 

N 

•     •     •     •             ,^2/    •     •     •              ^ 

:  :  ^  ?  -1  'T'  :  ■  ■  •  -  '^^  -  *  •  :<^r^^ 

.  :  :  :       5?—  •  •       B.  •  ■  '  '  ' 

C 
71 

•      •      •    IP    ^   hir^  |£?   18?'  IP  tf?*  |„    P      !    ft/.tv     i      :      i^-f^      !      !      *      i      ! 

5 

< 

a! 

r  iS 
ft 

u 

»•"•"•••            *■••■••••■■•■•■••• 

•            • 

••••            •«•■••••••••■••••••            •• 

••••••••■•■•,••••.••.•>            •« 

< 
> 

< 
z 

o 
K 

ll 

•sS*£ 3*S'S    •    •    'vSi 

O     >D     )0      <e    <rt    •-•<-.    ;:2    :^    'S    ^      S3    <:3      <t»    sfl   ^55    ^    'O      0      c«      ^    ^  =2.    ::^     :-    :^    :0 

J 

a 

o 

> 

a 

Si 

-*■ 

1- 

2  Laryngo-palatalis 

3  „         labialis 

4  Gutturalis  brevis 

0  .2     oi 

>      b 

^  s 

.2 

CO     b. 

8  Dentalis  brevis 

9  „        longa   

0  Lingualis  brevis 

^1         „         longa    

2  Labialis  brevis 

1 4  Gutturo-palatalis  brevis   .  .  . 

5  „                longa    .  .  . 

6  Diphthongus  gutturo-palatalis 

9  Gutturo-labialis  brevis  .  .  ^  . 

10  „              longa  .... 

11  Diphthongus  gutturo-labialis 

)9 

J4  Gutturalis  fracta 

J  5  Palatalis  fracta 

J6  Labialis  fracta 

J 

3 

5 

3 

April,  1884. 

(ttlatentron  ^tess^   ©xfortr 

A  SELECTION  OF 

BOOKS 

PUBLISHED   FOR  THE  UNIVERSITY  BY 

HENRY    FROWDE, 

AT    THE    OXFORD    UNIVERSITY    PRESS    WAREHOUSE, 
AMEN    CORNER,    LONDON. 

ALSO  TO   BE   HAD   AT  THE 

CLARENDON    PRESS     DEPOSITORY,     OXFORD. 

\Every   book   is  bound  in   cloth,    unless  otherwise   described?^ 


LEXICONS,  GRAMMARS,  &c. 

(See  also  Clarendon  Press  Series,  pp.  14,  18,  21,  24,  25.) 

Anglo-Saxon. — An  Anglo-Saxon  Dictionary,  based  on  the 

MS.  Collections  of  the  late  Joseph  Bosworth,  D.D.,  Professor  of  Anglo-Saxon, 
Oxford.  Edited  and  enlarged  by  Prof.  T.  N.  Toller,  M.A.  (To  be  completed 
in  four  parts.)     Parts  I  and  II.     1882.   4to.  15^-.  each. 

Chinese.— y4  Handbook  of  the  Chinese  Language.     Parts   I 

and  II,  Grammar  and  Chrestomathy.  By  James  Summers.  1863.  8vo. 
half  bound,  i/.  Ss. 

English. — A  New  English  Dictionary,  on  Historical  Prin- 
ciples :  founded  mainly  on  the  materials  collected  by  the  Philological  Society. 
Edited  by  James  A.  H.  Murray,  LL.D.,  President  of  the  Philological  Society; 
with  the  assistance  of  many  Scholars  and  men  of  Science.  Part  I.  A — ANT 
(pp.  xvi,  352).     Imperial  4to.  I2J-.  dd. 

An  Etymological  Dictionary  of  the  English  Language, 

arranged  on  an  Historical  Basis.     By  W.  W.  Skeat,  M.A.    1882.   4to.  2/.  4^-. 

A  Concise  Etymological  Dictionary  of  the  English  Lan- 


guage.    By  W.  W.  Skeat,  M.A.     1882,    Crown  8vo.  5J.  6(/. 
Greek. — A     Greek-English     Lexicon,    by-    Henry     George 

Liddell,  D.D.,  and  Robert  Scott,  D.D.     Seventh  Edition,  Revised  and  Aug- 
mented throughout.     1883.    4to.  \l.  i6j. 

[9] 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 


Greek. — A  Greek-English  Lexicon,  abridged  from  Liddell  and 

Scott's   4to.   edition,  chiefly   for   the  use  of  Schools.      Twentieth  Edition. 
Carefully  Revised  throughout.     1883.     Square  i2mo.  ']s.6d. 

A  copious  Greek-English  Vocabulary^  compiled  from  the 

best  authorities.     1850.    24mo,  3J-. 

A  Practical  Introduction  to  Greek  Accentuation,  by  H. 


W.  Chandler,  M.A.     Second  Edition.     1881.    8vo.  \os.  6d. 

Hebrew. — The   Book   of  Hebrew   Roots,    by  Abu    '1-Walid 

Marwan  ibn  Janah,  otherwise  called  Rabbi  Yonah.    Now  first  edited,  with  an 
Appendix,  by  Ad.  Neubauer.     1875.    4to.  2/.  "js.  6d. 

' A   Treatise  07t  the  use  of  the  Tenses  in  Hebreiv.     By 

S.  R.  Driver,  M.A.     Second  Edition,  Revised  and  Enlarged.     1881.  Extra 
fcap.  8vo.  7^.  ()d. 

Hebreiv  Accentuation   of  Psalms,   Proverbs,   and   Job. 


By  William  Wickes,  D.D.     1881.    Demy  8vo.  stiff  covers,  5^. 

Icelandic. — An  Icelandic-English  Dictionary,  based  on  the 

MS.  collections  of  the  late  Richard  Cleasby.  Enlarged  and  completed  by 
G.  Vigfusson,  M.A.  With  an  Introduction,  and  Life  of  Richard  Cleasby,  by 
G.  Webbe  Dasent,  D.C.L.     1874.  410.  3/.  7^. 

• A  List  of  English  Words  the  Etymology  of  zvhich  is 

illustrated  by  covifarison  with  Icelandic.  Prepared  in  the  form  of  an 
Appendix  to  the  above.    By  W.  W.  Skeat,  M.A.     1876.  stitched,  2s. 

An  Icelandic  Prose  Reader,  with   Notes,  Grammar  and 

Glossary,  by  Dr.  Gudbrand  Vigfusson  and  F.  York  Powell,  M.A,  1879. 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  \os.()d, 

Latin. — A  Latin  Dictionary,  founded  on  Andrews'  edition 

of  Freund's  Latin  Dictionary,  revised,  enlarged,  and  in  great  part  rewritten 
by  Charlton  T.  Lewis,  Ph.D.,  and  Charles  Short,  LL.D.    1879.  410.  i/.  5^-. 

Sanskrit. — A  Practical  Grammar  of  the  Sanskrit  Language, 

arranged  with  reference  to  the  Classical  Languages  of  Europe,  for  the  use  of 
English  Students,  by  Monier  Williams,  M.A.    Fourth  Edition,  1877.  8vo.  15^. 

A    Sanskrit-EnglisJi   Dictionary,    Etymologically    and 

Philologically  arranged,  with  special  reference  to  Greek,  Latin,  German,  Anglo- 
Saxon,  English,  and  other  cognate  Indo-European  Languages.  By  Monier 
Williams,  M.A.     1872.  4to.  4/.  14^.  ^d. 

Nalopdkhydnam.     Story   of   Nala,  an    Episode   of  the 

Maha-Bharata :  the  Sanskrit  text,  with  a  copious  Vocabulary,  and  an  improved 
version  of  Dean  Milman's  Translation,  by  Monier  Williams,  M.A.  Second 
Edition,  Revised  and  Improved.     1879.  Svo.  15^. 

■  Sakuntald.    A  Sanskrit  Drama,  in  Seven  Acts.    Edited 


by  Monier  Williams,  M.A.     Second  Edition,  1876.    Svo.  2\s. 

Syriac. — TJicsaurus  Syriacus :  collegerunt  Quatremere,  Bern- 
stein, Lorsbach,  Arnoldi,  Field  :  edidit  R.  Payne  Smith,  S.T.P.  Fasc.  I-VI. 
1868-83.  sm,  fol,  each,  i/.  is.    Vol.  I,  containing  Fasc.  I-V,  sm.  fol.  5/.  5^. 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 


GBEEK  CLASSICS,  &c. 

Aristophanes:    A   Complete   Concordance   to   the  Comedies 

and  Fragments.     By  Henry  Dunbar,  M.D.     4to.  i/.  is. 

Aristotle :  The  Politics,  translated  into  English,  with  Intro- 
duction, Marginal  Analysis,  Notes,  and  Indices,  by  B.  Jowett,  M.A.  Medium 
8vo.     Nearly  ready. 

Heracliti  Ephesii   Reliquiae.     Recensuit    I.    By  water,   M.A. 

Appendicis  loco  additae  sunt  Diogenis  Laertii  Vita  Heracliti,  Particulae  Hip»- 
pocratei  De  Diaeta  Libri  Primi,  Epistolae  Heracliteae.   1877.  8vo.  6j. 

Homer:    A    Complete   Concordance    to    the    Odyssey    and 

Hymns  of  Homer ;  to  which  is  added  a  Concordance  to  the  Parallel  Passages 
in  the  Iliad,  Odyssey,  and  Hymns.  By  Henry  Dunbar,  M.D.    1880.    4to.  \l.\s. 

Scholia  Graeca   in  Iliade^n.      Edited  by  Professor  W. 

Dindorf,  after  a  new  collation  of  the  Venetian  MSS.  by  D.  B.  Monro,  M.A., 
Fellow  of  Oriel  College. 

Vols.  I.  II.  1875.  Svo.  24J. 

Vol.  HI.  IV.  1877.  Svo.  26J. 


Scholia  Graeca  in   Odysseam.     Edidit  Guil.  Dindorfius 

Tomi  II.     1855,  Svo.    x^s.dd. 

Plato :  Apology,  with  a  revised  Text  and  English  Notes,  and 

a  Digest  of  Platonic  Idioms,  by  James  Riddell,  M.A.     1878.  Svo.  Sj.  ^d. 

Philehus,  with  a  revised  Text  and  English  Notes,  by 

Edward  Poste,  M.A.     i860.   Svo.  7.?.  6(/. 

Sophistes  and  Politicns,  with  a  revised  Text  and  English 

Notes,  by  L.  Campbell,  M.A.     1867.    Svo.  i8j. 

Theaetetns,  with  a  revised  Text   and    English   Notes, 


by  L.  Campbell,  M.A.    Second  Edition.    Svo.  xos.dd. 

The  Dialogues,  translated  into  English,  with  Analyses 

and  Introductions,  by  B.  Jowelt,  M.A.    A  new  Edition  in  5  volumes,  medium 
Svo.    1875.    3/.  loj. 

The  Republic,  translated  into  English,  with  an  Analysis 

and  Introduction,  by  B.  Jowett,  M.A.     Medium  Svo.    12s.  6d. 

Index  to.    Compiled  for  the  Second  Edition  of  Professor 

Jowett's  Translation  of  the  Dialogues.      By  Evelyn  Abbott,   M.A.      1875. 
Svo.  paper  covers,  2^.  dd. 

Thucydides :    Translated    into    English,    with    Introduction, 

Marginal  Analysis,  Notes,  and  Indices.    By  B.  Jowett,  M.A.    2  vols.    1881. 
Medium  Svo.    i/.  \is. 

B   2 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 


THE   HOLY   SCRIPTURES,   &c. 

English. —  The  Holy  Bible  in  the  earliest  English  Versions, 

made  from  the  Latin  Vulgate  by  John  Wycliffe  and  his  followers  :  edited  by 
the  Rev.  J.  Forshall  and  Sir  F.  Madden.   4  vols.   1850,   Royal  4to.  3/.  3^. 

[Also  reprinted  from  the  above,  with  Introduction  and  Glossary 

by  W.  W.   Skeat,  M.A. 

The  Books  of  Job,  Psalms,  Proverbs,  Ecclesiastes,  and  the 

Song  of  Solomon :  according  to  the  Wycliffite  Version  made  by  Nicholas 
de  Hereford,  about  A.D.  1381,  and  Revised  by  John  Purvey,  about  a.d.  1388. 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.     3^.  6d. 


—  The  New  Testa7nent  in  English,  according  to  the  Version 
by  John  Wycliffe,  about  A.D.  1380,  and  Revised  by  John  Purvey,  about  A.D. 
1388.     Extra  fcap.    8vo.    6j.] 


The  Holy  Bible :  an  exact  reprint,  page  for  page,  of  the 

Authorised  Version  published  in  the  yeari6i  I.    Demy  4to.  half  bound,   \l.  \s. 

Gothic. —  The   Gospel  of  St.  Mark  in   Gothic,  according  to 

the  translation  made  by  Wulfila  in  the  Fourth  Century.  Edited  with  a 
Grammatical  Introduction  and  Glossarial  Index  by  \V.  W,  Skeat,  M.A. 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  4^. 

Greek. —  Vetus  Testamentum  ex  Versione  Septuaginta  Inter- 

pretum  secundum  exemplar  VaticanumRomae  editum.  Accedit  potior  varietas 
Codicis  Alexandrini.   Tomi  III.    Editio  Altera.    i8mo.  iSj-. 

Origenis   Hexaplonim  quae   supersunt ;    sive,  Veterum 

Interpretum  Graecorum  in  totum  Vetus  Testamentum  Fragmenta.  Edidit 
Fridericus  Field,  A.M.     2  vols.     1875.    4to.    5/.  5^-. 

The   Book   of   Wisdom :    the    Greek   Text,    the    Latin 

Vulgate,  and  the  Authorised  English  Version ;  with  an  Introduction,  Critical 
Apparatus,  and  a  Commentary.  By  William  J.  Deane,  M.A.  Small  4to.  1 2s.  6d. 

Novum  Testamentum  Graece.  Antiquissimorum  Codicum 

Textus  in  ordine  parallelo  dispositi.  Accedit  collalio  Codicis  Sinaitici.  Edidit 
E.  H.  Hansell,  S.T.  B,   Tomi  III.    1S64.    Svo.    half  morocco,   2l.12s.6d. 

Novum    Testamentum   Graece.     Accedunt    parallela   S. 

Scripturae  loca,  necnon  vetus  capitulorum  nolatio  et  canones  Eusebii.  Edidit 
Carolus  Lloyd,  S.  T.  P.  R.     iSmo.  3^-. 

The  same  on  writing  paper,  with  large  margin,    10^. 

Novum  Testamentum  Graece  juxta.  Exemplar  Millianum. 


1 8  mo.    2s.  6d. 

The  same  on  writing  paper,  with  large  margin,  gs. 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 


Greek. — EvangeUa  Sacra  Graece.     Fcap.  8vo.  limp,  \s.  6d. 
The  Greek   Testament,  with  the  Readings  adopted  by 


the  Revisers  of  the  Authorised  Version  : — 

(i)  Pica  type.     Second  Edition,  with  Marginal  References.     Demy  8vo. 
loj'.  (>d. 

(2)  Long  Primer  type.     Fcap.  8vo.   45.  dd. 

(3)  The  same,  on  writing  paper,  with  wide  margin,  15s. 

The  Parallel  New  Testament,  Greek  and  Enghsh  ;  being 

the  Authorised  Version,  161 1;  the  Revised  Version,  1881 ;  and  the  Greek 
Text  followed  in  the  Revised  Version.     8vo.    1 2j.  dd. 

The  Revised  Version  is  the  joint  property  of  the  Universities  of  Oxford  and  Cambridge . 

Canon   Mnratorianns :    the   eadiest    Catalogue   of  the 

Books  of  the  New  Testament.  Edited  with  Notes  and  a  Facsimile  of  the 
MS.  in  the  Ambrosian  Library  at  Milan,  by  S.  P.  Tregelles,  LL.D.  1867. 
4to.   \os.  isd. 

Outlines  of  Textual  Criticism  applied  to  the  New  Testa- 
ment.    By  C.  E.  Hammond,  M.A.    Third  Edition.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  3^.  dd. 

Hebrew,  etc. — The  Psalms  in  Hebrew  without  points.     1879. 

Crown  8vo.   y.  dd. 


—  A   Commentary  on   the  Book  of  Proverbs.     Attributed 

to  Abraham  Ibn  Ezra.      Edited  from  a  MS.  in  the  Bodleian  Library  by 
S.  R.  Driver,  M.A.     Crown  8vo.  paper  covers,  3^-.  dd. 


—   The  Book  of  Tobit.     A  Chaldee  Text,  from  a  unique 

MS.  in  the  Bodleian  Library ;  with  other  Rabbinical  Texts,  English  Transla- 
tions, and  the  Itala.    Edited  by  Ad.  Neubauer,  M.A.    1878.    Crown  8vo.  6j-. 

Horae  Hebraic ae  et  Talmudicac,  a  J.  Lightfoot.     A  new 


Edition,  by  R.  Gandell,  M.A.     4  vols.    1859.  8vo.  i/.  \s. 

Latin. — Libri  Psalmorum  Versio  antiqua  Latina,  cum  Para- 

phrasi  Anglo-Saxonica.     Edidit  B.  Thorpe,  F.A.S.     1835.    8vo.  \os.  6d. 

Old-Latin  Biblical  Texts :  No.  /.  The  Gospel  according 

to  St.  Matthew  from  the  St.  Germain  MS.  (g,).  Edited  with  Introduction 
and  Appendices  by  John  Wordsworth,  M.A.     Small  4to.,  stiff  covers,  6j. 

Old-French. — Libri  Psalmorum  Versio  antiqua  Gallica  e 

Cod.  MS.  in  Bibl.  Bodleiana  adservato,  una  cum  Versione^Metrica  aliisque 
Monumentis  pervetustis.  Nunc  primum  descripsit  et  edidit  Franciscus  Michel, 
Phil.  Doct.    i860.  8vo.   IOJ-.  6d. 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 


FATHERS  OP  THE  CHURCH,  &c. 

St.  AthanasiuS :  Historical  Writings,  according  to  the  Bene- 
dictine Text.  With  an  Introduction  by  William  Bright,  D.D.  1881.  Crown 
8vo.   lOJ.  (>d. 

' Orations  against  the  Arians.     With  an  Account  of  his 

Life  by  William  Bright,  D.D.     1873.   Crown  8vo.  Q)S. 

St.  Augustine :  Select  Anti-Pelagian  Treatises,  and  the  Acts 

of  the  Second  Council  of  Orange.     With  an  Introduction  by  William  Bright, 
D.D.     Crown  8vo.  9^. 

Canons  of  the  First  Four  General  Councils  of  Nicaea,  Con- 
stantinople, Ephesus,  and  Chalcedon.   1877.  Crown  8vo.  2s.  dd. 

Notes  on  the  Cajions  of  the  First  Four  General  Councils. 


By  William  Bright,  D.D.     1882.    Crown  8vo.  5^.  6^/. 

Cyrilli  Archiepiscopi  Alexandrini  in  XII  Prophetas.     Edidit 
P.  E.  Pusey,  A.M.    Tomill.     1868.  8vo.  cloth,  2/.  is. 

in  D.  jfoannis  Evangelium.     Accedunt  Fragmenta  varia 

necnon  Tractatus  ad  Tiberium    Diaconum  duo.     Edidit  post  Aubertum  P. 
E.  Pusey,  A.M.    Tomi  III.     1872.  8vo.  2/.  5^. 

. Commentarii    in    Lucae   Evangelium    quae    supersunt 

Syriace.     E  MSS.  apud  Mas.  Britan.  edidit  R.   Payne  Smith,  A.M.     1858. 

4tO.     l/.  2S. 

Translated  by  R.  Payne  Smith,  M.A.     2  vols.     1859. 

8vo.   14^'. 

Ephraemi  Syri,  Rabulae  Episcopi  Edesseni,  Balaei,  aliorum- 

que  Opera  Selecta.   E  Codd.  Syriacis  MSS.  in  Museo  Britannico  et  Bibliotheca 
Bodleiana  asservatis  primus  edidit  J.  J.  Overbeck.     1865.  8vo.    i/.  is. 

Eusebius'    Ecclesiastical  History,    according   to    the   text   of 

Burton,  with  an  Introduction  by  William  Bright,  D.D.     1881.    Crown  8vo. 
8j.  M. 

Irenaeus :   The  Third  Book  of  St.  Irenaeus,  Bishop  of  Lyons, 

against  Heresies.     With  short  Notes  and  a  Glossary  by  H.  Deane,  B.D. 
1874.  Crown  8vo.   f^s.  6d. 

Patrum    Apostolicoruin,    S.   Clementis    Romani,    S.   Ignatii, 

S.  Polycarpi,  quae  supersunt.      Edidit  Guil.  Jacobson,  S.T.P.R.      Tomi  II. 
Fourth  Edition,  1863.  8vo.   \l.  \s. 

Socrates^  Ecclesiastical  History,   according  to    the   Text   of 

Hussey,  with  an  Introduction  by  William  Blight,  D.D.     187S.    Crown  8vo. 
^s.  6d. 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 


ECCLESIASTICAL  HISTOBY,  BIOGRAPHY,  &c. 

Ancient  Liturgy  of  the  Church  of  England,  according  to  the 

uses  of  Sarum,  York,  Hereford,  and  Bangor,  and  the  Roman  Liturgy  arranged 
in  parallel  columns,  with  preface  and  notes.  By  William  Maskell,  M.A. 
Third  Edition.     1882.   8vo.  15^. 

Bacdae  Historia  Ecclesiastica.     Edited,  with  English  Notes, 

by  G.  H.  Moberly,  M.A.  1881.    Crown  8vo.   \os.  6rf. 

Bright  (  W}j.     Chapters   of  Early  English    Church  LListory, 

18  78.    8vO.     I2J'. 

Burnet  s  History  of  the  Reformation  of  the  Church  of  England. 

A  new  Edition.  Carefully  revised,  and  the  Records  collated  with  the  originals, 
by  N.  Pocock,  M.A.     7  vols.  1865.    Svo.  Price  reduced  to  \l.  \os. 

Comicils  and  Ecclesiastical  Documents  relating  to  Great  Britain 

and  Ireland.  Edited,  after  Spelman  and  Wilkins,  by  A.  W.  Haddan,  B.D., 
and  W.  Stubbs,  M.A.   Vols.  I.  and  III.    1869-71.  Medium  8vo.  each  \l.  \s. 

Vol.  II.  Part  I.  1873.  Medium  8vo.    loj-.  (yd. 

Vol.11.  Part  II.    1878.    Church  of  Ireland;   Memorials  of  St.  Patrick. 
Stiff  covers,  3^.  dd. 

Hammond  {C.  E.).    Liturgies,  Eastern  and  Western.    Edited, 

with  Introduction,  Notes,  and  a  Liturgical  Glossary.  1878.  Crown  Svo. 
10s.  6d. 

An  Appendix  to  tlie  above.     1879.  Crown  Svo.  paper  covers,  is.  6d. 

'John,  Bishop  of  Ephesus.     The    Third  Part  of  his   Eccle- 
siastical History.     [In  Syriac]     Now  first  edited  by  William  Cureton,  M.A. 

1853.    4t0.    \l.   I2J. 

Translated  by  R.  Payne  Smith,  M.A.     i860.  Svo.  \os. 

Leofric  Missal,   The,   as  used    in   the   Cathedral  of  Exeter 

during  the  Episcopate  of  its  first  Bishop,  A.D.  1050-1072  ;  together  with  some 
Account  of  the  Red  Book  of  Derby,  the  Missal  of  Robert  of  Jumieges,  and  a 
few  other  early  MS.  Service  Books  of  the  English  Church.  Edited,  with  In- 
troduction and  Notes,  by  F.  E.  Warren,  B.D.    4to.  half  morocco,  35^-. 

Monumenta  Ritualia  Ecclesiae  Anglicanae.     The   occasional 

Offices  of  the  Church  of  England  according  to  the  old  use  of  Salisbury,  the 
Prymer  in  English,  and  other  prayers  and  forms,  with  dissertations  and  notes. 
By  William  Maskell,  M.A.     Second  Edition.     1882.  3  vols.  8vo.  2/.  \os. 

Records  of  the  Reformation.   The  Divorce,  1527-1533.   Mostly 

now  for  the  first  time  printed  from  MSS.  in  the  British  Museum  and  other 
libraries.  Collected  and  arranged  by  N.  Pocock,  M.A.  1870.  2  vols.  Svo. 
\l.  1 6 J. 


8  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 

SJmdey  (  W.  W.).    Some  Account  of  the  Church  in  the  Apostolic 
Age.     Second  Edition,  1874.   fcap.  8vo.  3s.  6rf. 

Stubbs  (  W.).     Registrnm  Sacrum  Anglicanum.     An  attempt 

to  exhibit  the  course  of  Episcopal  Succession  in  England.     1858.  Small  ^to. 

Warren  {F.  E.).     Liturgy  and  Ritual  of  the  Celtic  Church. 

1881.  8vo.  i/[s. 

ENGLISH    THEOLOGY. 

Butler's  Works,  with  an  Index  to  the  Analogy.    2  vols.   1874. 

8vo.  IIS. 

Alio  separately, 

Sermons,  ^s.  6d.  Analogy  of  Religion,  ^s.  6d. 

Gresivell's  Harmonia  Evangelica.     Fifth  Edition.    8vo.    1 855. 

9^.  6(/. 
Heurtle/s  Harmonia   Symbolica:    Creeds    of    the   Western 

Church.     1858.    8vo.  6s.  6d. 

Homilies    appointed    to    be    read    in    Churches.     Edited    by 

J.  Griffiths,  M.A.     1859.  8vo.   ^s.  dd. 

Hooker  s  Woj^ks,  with  his  life  by  Walton,  arranged  by  John 

Keble,  M.A.     Sixth  Edition,  1874.   3  vols.  Svo.  i/.  lis.  6d. 

the  text   as  arranged  by  John    Keble,   M.A.     3  vols. 

1875.  8vo.    IIS. 

JezveVs  Works.     Edited  by  R.  W.  Jelf,  D.D.     8  vols.    1848. 

8vo.  il.  los. 

Pearsoi^s  Exposition  of  the  Creed.     Revised  and  corrected  by 

E.  Burton,  D.D.   Sixth  Edition,  1877.  8vo.   loj-.  6d. 

Waterland's  Review  of  the  Doctrine  of  the  Eucharist,  with 

a  Preface  by  the  present  Bishop  of  London.    1880.  Crown  8vo.  ds.  6d. 


Works,  with  Life,  by  Bp.  Van  Mildert.    A  new  Edition, 

with  copious  Indexes.    6  vols.     1856.    Svo.    2I.  lis. 

Wheatlys  Illustration  of  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer.    A  new 

Edition,  1846.  8vo.  ^s. 

Wyclif.     A  Catalogue  of  the  Original  Works  of  John  Wyclif, 
by  W.  W.  Shirley,  D.D.     1865.  Svo.  3^.  6d. 

Select  English    Works.     By  T.  Arnold,  M.A.    3  vols. 

1869-1871.  8vo.      Price  reduced  to  il.  is. 

Trialogus.     With    the    Supplement    now   first    edited. 


By  Gotthard  Lechler.   1869.   Svo.    Price  reduced  to  "js 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 


HISTORICAL    AND    DOCUMENTARY   WORKS. 

British  Barrows,  a  Record  of  the  Examination  of  Sepulchral 

Mounds  in  various  parts  of  England.  By  William  Greenwell,  M.A.,  F.S.A. 
Together  with  Description  of  Figures  of  Skulls,  General  Remarks  on  Pre- 
historic Crania,  and  an  Appendix  by  George  RoUeston,  M.D.,  F.R.S.  1877. 
Medium  8vo.  25^. 

Britton.     A    Treatise   upon   the   Common   Law   of  England, 

composed  by  order  of  King  Edward  I.  The  French  Text  carefully  revised, 
with  an  English  Translation,  Introduction,  and  Notes,  by  F.  M.  Nichols,  M.A. 
2  vols.     1865.  Royal  8vo.  \l.  xds. 

Clarendon'' s   {Edw.  Earl  of)  History  of  the  Rebellion    and 

Civil  Wars  in  England.    7  vols.     1839.  i8mo.  il.  is. 

Clarendons   [Edw.  Earl  of)  History   of  the  Rebellion   and 

Civil  Wars  in  England.  Also  his  Life,  written  by  himself,  in  which  is  in- 
cluded a  Continuation  of  his  History  of  the  Grand  Rebellion.  With  copious 
Indexes.     In  one  volume,  royal  8vo.  1842.  i/.  is. 

Clinton  s  Epitome  of  the  Fasti  Hellenici.     1851.     8vo.    6s.  6d. 

Epitome  of  the  Fasti  Romani.     1854.     8vo.    75. 

Corpvs  Poeticvm  Boi'eale.     The  Poetry  of  the  Old  Northern 

Tongue,  from  the  Earliest  Times  to  the  Thirteenth  Century.  Edited,  clas- 
sified, and  translated,  with  Introduction,  Excursus,  and  Notes,  by  Gudbrand 
Vigfusson,  M.A.,  and  F.  York  Powell,  M.A.     2  vols.     1883.  8vo.  42^. 

Freeman  [E.  A.).  History  of  the  Norman  Conquest  of  Eng- 
land; its  Causes  and  Results.    In  Six  Volumes.   8vo.  5/.  (js.  6d. 

Vols.  I-II  together,  3rd  edition,  1877.  i/.  i6.f. 

Vol.  Ill,  2nd  edition,  1874.  i/.  is. 

Vol.  IV,  2nd  edition,  1875.  i/.  is. 

Vol.  V,  1876.  1/.  1^. 

Vol.  VI.     Index.     1879.  ^vo.  los.  6d. 

Freeman  {E.  A.).      The  Reign  of  William  Rnfis  and  the 

Accession  of  Henry  the  First,     2  vols.  8vo.  il.ids. 

Gascoigne's     Theological    Dictionary    ("Liber    Veritatum") : 

Selected  Passages,  illustrating  the  condition  of  Church  and  State,  1403-1458. 
With  an  Introduction  by  James  E.  Thorold  Rogers,  M.P.  Small  4to.  los.  6d. 

Magna  Carta,  a  careful  Reprint.    Edited  by  W.  Stubbs,  M.A. 

1879.  4*^0'  stitched,  is. 

Passio  et  Miracida  Beati  Olaui.  Edited  from  a  Twelfth- 
Century  MS.  in  the  Library  of  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford,  with  an  In- 
troduction and  Notes,  by  Frederick  Metcalfe,  M.A.  Small  4to.  stiff  covers,  ds. 


lo  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 

Protests  of  the  Lords,  including  those  which  have  been  ex- 
punged, from  1624  to  1874;  with  Historical  Introductions.  Edited  by  James 
E.  Thorold  Rogers,  M.A.    1875.    3  vols.  8vo.  2/.  2J. 

Rogers  [J.  E.  T.).     History   of  Agriculture   and  Prices   in 

England,  A.D.  1 259-1 793. 

Vols.  I  and  II  (1259-1400).   1866.  8vo.   2/.  2s. 
Vols.  Ill  andIV  (1401-1582).  1882.  8vo.  2/  ioj-. 

Stnrlnnga  Saga,  including  the  Islendinga  Saga  of  Lawman 

Sturla  Thordsson  and  other  works.      Edited  by  Dr.  Gudbrand  Vigfusson. 
In  2  vols.     1878.  8vo.  2/.  2s, 

Tzvo   of  the  Saxon  Chronicles  parallel,  with   Supplementary 

Extracts  from  the  Others.     Edited,  with  Introduction,  Notes,  and  a  Glos- 
sarial  Index,  by  J.  Earle,  M.A.     1865.     8vo.  i6i-. 


Statutes  made  for  the  University  of  Oxford,  and  for  the  Colleges 

and  Halls  therein,  by  the  University  of  Oxford  Commissioners.     1882.     8vo. 
\2S.  dd. 

Also  separately, 

Statutes  made  for  the  University,     is. 

the  Colleges.     \s.  each. 

Statuta  Universitatis  Oxoniensis.     1883.     8vo.  ^s. 

The  Stndenfs   Handbook   to   the   University  and  Colleges   of 

Oxford.     Seventh  Edition.     1883.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s.  6d. 


MATHEMATICS,  PHYSICAL   SCIENCE,  &c. 

Acland  {H.  IV.,  M.D.,  F.R.S.).     Synopsis  of  the  Pathological 

Series  in  the  Oxford  Museum.     1867.    8vo.   2s.  (>d. 

Astronomical  Observations  made  at  the  University  Observ- 
atory, Oxford,  under  the  direction  of  C.  Pritchard,  M.A.  No.  i.  1878. 
Royal  8vo.  paper  covers,  3^^.  dd. 

Mailer  (y.).     On  certain  Variations  in  the  Vocal  Organs  of 

the  Passeres  that  have  hitherto  escaped  notice.  Translated  by  F.  J.  Bell,  B.A., 
and  edited  with  an  Appendix,  by  A.  H.  Garrod,  M.A.,  F.R.S.  With  Plates. 
1878.    4to.  paper  covers,  7.';.  6d. 

Phillips  {John,  M.A.,  F.RS.).     Geology  of  Oxford  and  the 

Valley  of  the  Thames.     1871.    8vo.   2\s. 

Vesuvius.    1869.    Crown  8vo.    loj-.  6d. 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.  ii 

Price  [Bartholomeiv,  M.A.,  F.R.S.).     Treatise  on  Infinitesimal 

Calculus. 

Vol.1.  Differential  Calculus.     Second  Edition.     8vo.  14.?.  6(/. 

Vol.  II.  Integral  Calculus,  Calculus  of  Variations,  and  Differential  Equations. 
Second  Edition,  1865.     Svo.   i8j-. 

Vol.  III.  Statics,  including  Attractions ;    Dynamics  of  a  Material   Particle. 
Second  Edition,  1868.     8vo.  i6j-. 

Vol.  IV.  Dynamics  of  Material  Systems ;  together  with  a  chapter  on  Theo- 
retical Dynamics,  by  W.  F.  Donkin,  M.A.,  F.R.S.     1862.     8vo.  i6j-. 

Rigaud's  Correspondence  of  Scientific  Men  of  the  J'jth  Centn^y, 

with  Table  of  Contents  by  A.  de  Morgan,  and  Index  by  the  Rev.  J.  Rigaud, 
M.A.     2  vols.     1841-1862.     8vo.  18^-.  6^/. 

Sachs'  Text-Book  of  Botany,  Morphological  and  Physiological. 

A  New  Edition.  Translated  by  S.  H.  Vines,  M.A.  1882.  Royal  Svo.,  half 
morocco,  \l.  \is.  6d. 

Westzuood  [y.  O.,  M.A.,  F.R.S.).      Thesanrns  Entonwlogicns 

Hopeianus,  or  a  Description  of  the  rarest  Insects  in  the  Collection  given  to 
the  University  by  the  Rev.  William  Hope.  With  40  Plates.  1874.  Small 
folio,  half  morocco,  7/.  los. 


W^z  ^acretj  l^m\%  of  tj^e  lEast. 

Translated  by  various  Oriental  Scholars,  and  edited  by 

F.  Max  Mijller. 

[Demy  8vo.  cloth.] 

Vol.    I.    The   Upanishads.     Translated  by  F.  Max    Miiller. 

Part  I.  The  A7^andogya-upanishad,  The  Talavakara-upanishad,  The  Aitareya- 
ara;;yaka,  The  Kaushitaki-brahmawa-upanishad,  and  The  Va^asaneyi-sa;«hita- 
upanishad.     \cs.  6d. 

Vol.  II.  The  Sacred  Laws  of  the  Aryas,  as  taught  in    the 

Schools  of  Apastamba,  Gautama,  VasishMa,  and  Baudhayana.  Translated  by 
Prof.  Georg  Biihler.     Part  I,  Apastamba  and  Gautama,     los.  6d. 

Vol.  III.  The  Sacred  Books  of  China.  The  Texts  of  Con- 
fucianism. Translated  by  James  Legge.  Part  I.  The  Shfl  King,  The  Reli- 
gious portions  of  the  Shih  King,  and  The  Hsiao  King.     1 2s.  6d. 

Vol.   IV.  The  Zend-Avesta.     Translated  by  James  Darme- 

steter.     Part  I.     The  Vendidad.     loj-.  6d. 


12  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 

Vol.  V.   The   Pahlavi    Texts.      Translated   by  E.  W.  West. 

Part  I.  The  Bimdahij,  Bahman  Yaj't,  and  Shayast  la-shayast.     \2s.  6d. 

Vols.  VI  and  IX.  The  Qur'an.     Parts  I  and  II.     Translated 

by  E.  H.  Palmer.     2is. 

Vol.  VII.    The  Institutes  of  Vish;m.     Translated   by  Julius 

Jolly.     IOJ-.  6d. 

Vol.  VIII.  The  Bhagavadgita,  with  The  Sanatsu^atiya,  and 

The  Anugita.     Translated  by  Kashinath  Trimbak  Telang.     los.  6d. 

Vol.  X.  The  Dhammapada,  translated  from  Pali  by  F.  Max 

Miiller ;  and  The  Sutta-Nipata,  translated  from  Pali  by  V.  Fausboll ;  being 
Canonical  Books  of  the  Buddhists,     los.  td. 

Vol.  XI.  Buddhist  Suttas.      Translated  from   Pali  by  T.  W. 

Rhys  Davids,  i.  The  Mahaparinibbana  Suttanta ;  2.  The  Dhamma-^akka- 
ppavattana  Sutta  ;  3.  The  Tevi_§;§-a  Suttanta ;  4.  The  Akaiikheyya  Sutta ; 
5.  TheAetokhila  Sutta;  6.  The  Maha-sudassana  Suttanta;  7.  The  Sabbasava 
Sutta.     los.  6d. 

Vol.  XII.  The  5atapatha-Brahma«a,  according  to  the  Text 

of  the  Madhyandina  School.  Translated  by  Julius  Eggeling.  Part  I. 
Books  I  and  II.     1 2s.  6d. 

Vol.  XIII.  Vinaya   Texts.      Translated    from    the   Pali    by 

T.  W.  Rhys  Davids  and  Hermann  Oldenberg.  Part  I.  The  Patimokkha. 
The  Mahavagga,  I -IV.     los.  6d. 

Vol.  XIV.  The  Sacred  Laws  of  the  Aryas,  as  taught  in  the 

Schools  of  Apastamba,  Gautama,  Vasish///a  and  Baudhayana.  Translated 
by  Georg  Biihler.     Part  II.     VasishZ/^a  and  Baudhayana.     los.  6d. 

Vol.  XV.     The  Upanishads.     Translated  by  F.  Max  Miiller. 

Part  II.  The  Ka///a-upanishad,  The  Mu«(/aka-upanishad,  The  Taittiriyaka- 
upanishad,  The  Br/hadarawyaka-upanishad,  The  6"vetafvatara-upanishad,  The 
Praj«a-upanishad,  and  The  Maitrayawa-Brahmawa-upanishad.     10s.  6d. 

Vol.  XVI.  The  Sacred  Books  of  China.     The  Texts  of  Con- 
fucianism.    Translated  by  James  Legge.     Part  II.  The  Yi  King.     Jos.  6d. 

Vol.  XVII.    Vinaya   Texts.     Translated    from   the    Pali   by 

T.  W.  Rhys  Davids  and  Hermann  Oldenberg.  Part  II,  The  Mahavagga, 
V-X.     The  ^uUavagga,  I-III.     lo-r.  6d. 

Vol.  XVIII.    Pahlavi    Texts.      Translated    by  E.  W.  West. 

Part  II.     The  Da^istan-i  Dinik  and  The  Epistles  of  Manvij-iihar.     1 2s.  6d. 

Vol.  XIX.  The  Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king,     A  Life  of  Buddha 

by  Ajvaghosha  Bodhisattva,  translated  from  Sanskrit  into  Chinese  by  Dhar- 
maraksha,  a.d.  420,  and  from  Chinese  into  English  by  Samuel  Beal.     loj.  6d. 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.  13 

Vol.  XXI.     The  Saddharma-pu;/rt''arika,  or  the  Lotus  of  the 

True  Law.     Translated  by  H.  Kern,     xis.dd. 

Vol.    XXIII.     The   Zend-Avesta.     Part  II.     The  Sirozahs, 

Yarts,  and  Nyayu.     Translated  by  James  Darmesteter.     \os.  6d. 
The  following  Volumes  are  in  the  Press : — 
Vol.  XX.  Vinaya  Texts.     Translated  from  the  Pali  by  T.  W. 

Rhys  Davids  and  Hermann  Oldenberg.     Part  III.     The  Aiillavagga,  I-IV. 

Vol.  XXII.  The  A/^araiiga  Sutra.     Translated  by  H.  Jacobi. 
Vol.  XXIV.   Pahlavi  Texts.      Translated    by  E.  W.  West. 

Part  III.     Dina-i  Mainog-i  Khirad,  Shikand-gu-mani,  and  Sad-dar. 

Second  Series. 
Vol.  XXV.     Manu.    Translated  by  Georg  BilHLER.    Part  I. 
Vol.    XXVI.      Manu.      Translated    by    Georg     BtJHLER. 

Part  II. 

^nectfota  <©xonicnsia : 

[Small  4to,] 

Classical  Series.     I.  i.     The  English  Manuscripts  of  the  Ni- 

comachcan  Ethics,  described  in  relation  to  Bekker's  Manuscripts  and  other 
Sources.     By  J.  A.  Stewart,  M.A.     is.6d. 

I.  ii.     Nonius   Marcellus,    de    Compendiosa     Doctrina, 

Harleian  MS.  2719.     Collated  by  J.  H.  Onions,  M.A.     3^-.  dd. 

I.    iii.     AristotWs   Physics.     Book   VII.     Collation    of 

various  MSS. ;  with  an  Introduction  by  R.  Shute,  M.A.     2s. 

I.  iv.     Bentlcy  s  Plautine  Emendations.     From  his  copy 

of  Gronovius,     By  E.  A.  Sonnenschein,  M.A.     2^-.  (id. 

Semitic  Series.     I.  1.     Commentary  on  Ezra  and  Nehemiah. 

By  Rabbi  Saadiah.     Edited  by  H.  J.  Mathews,  M.A.     y.  6d. 

Aryan  Series.     I.  i.     Buddhist  Texts  from  Japan.     Edited 

by  F.  Max  Miiller,  M.A.     is.  6d. 

I.  ii.    Sukhavatt-  Vyiiha.     Description  of  Sukhavati,  the 

Land  of  Bliss.     Edited  by  F.  Max  Miiller,  M.A.,  and  Bunyiu  Nanjio.    'js.6d. 
Mediaeval  and  Modern  Series.     I.  i.  Sinonoma  Bartholomci ; 

A   Glossary  from   a   Fourteenth-Century  MS.    in   the  Library  of  Pembroke 
College,  Oxford.     Edited  by  J.  L.  G.  Mowat,  M.A.     3^-.  (>d. 

I.  iii.     The  Saltair  Na  Rann.     A  Collection  of  Early 

Middle  Irish  Poems.    Edited  from  a  MS.  in  the  Bodleian  Library  by  Whitley 
Stokes,  LL.D.     7^.  dd. 


14  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 


Ckmtir0n  l^ri^ss  Btxm 


I.    ENGLISH. 

A  First  Reading  Book.     By  Marie  Eichens  of  Berlin  ;    and 

edited  by  Anne  J.  Clough.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.    stiff  covers,  i,d. 

Oxford  Reading  Book,  Part  I.     For  Little  Children.     Extra 

fcap.  Svo.   stiff  covers,  6(/. 

Oxford  Reading  Book,  Part  II.     For  Junior  Classes.     Extra 
fcap.  Svo.    stiff  covers,  6cf. 

An  Elementary  English  Grammar  a7id  Exercise  Book.     By 

O.  W.  Tancock,  M.A.     Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.    \s.  6d. 

An  English  Grammar  and  Reading  Book,  for  Lower  Forms 

in  Classical  Schools.     By  O.  W.  Tancock,  M.A.     Fourth  Edition.     Extra 
fcap.  Svo.    3 J.  6^.  , 

Typical  Selectiojts  from  the  best  English  Writers,  with  Intro- 
ductory Notices.    Second   Edition.     In    Two  Volumes.     Extra  leap.  Svo. 
3J-.  6d.  each. 
Vol.  I.  Latimer  to  Berkeley.  Vol.  II.  Pope  to  Macaulay. 

Shairp  {J.  €.,  LL.D).     Aspects  of  Poetry ;    being  Lectures 

delivered  at  Oxford.     Crown  Svo.  \os.  dd. 


A  Book  for  the  Beginner  in  Anglo-Saxon.     By  John  Earle, 

M.A.     Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  2s.  6d. 

An  Anglo-Saxon  Reader.  In  Prose  and  Verse.  With  Gram- 
matical Introduction,  Notes,  and  Glossary.  By  Henry  Sweet,  M.A.  Fourth 
Edition,  Revised  and  Enlarged.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  %s.  dd. 

Aft  Anglo-Saxon  Primer,  tvith  Grammar,  Notes,  and  Glossary. 

By  the  same  Author.    Extra  fcap.  Svo.  2s.  6d. 

The   Philology  of  the  English   Tongne.     By  J.   Earle,  M.A. 

Third  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  'js.  6d. 

A  Handbook  of  Phonetics,  including  a  Popular  Exposition  of 

the  Principles  of  Spelling  Reform.     By  Henry  Sweet,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  Svo. 
4^.  dd. 

The  Ormulum;  with  the  Notes  and  Glossary  of  Dr.  R.  M. 
White.     Edited  by  R.  Holt,  M.A.   1878.    2  vols.    Extra  fcap.  Svo.  21J. 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.  15 

English   Plant  Names    from    the   Tenth   to    the   Fifteenth 

Century.     By  J.  Earle,  M.A.     Small  fcap.  8vo.  5s. 

Specimens  of  Early  English.     A  New  and  Revised  Edition. 

With  Introduction,  Notes,  and  Glossarial  Index.  By  R.  Morris,  LL.D.,  and 
W.  W.  Skeat,  M.A. 

Part  I.  From  Old  English  Homilies  to  King  Horn  (a.d.  1150  to  A.D.  1300). 
Extra  fcap.  Svo.  9^-. 

Part  II.     From  Robert  of  Gloucester  to  Cower  (A.D.  1298  to  A.D.  1393). 
Second  Edition.    Extra  fcap.  Svo.  7^.  6ci. 

Specimens    of  English    Literature,   from    the    '  Ploughmans 

Crede'  to  the  '  Shepheardes  Calender'  (a.d.  1394  to  A.D.  1579).  With  Intro- 
duction, Notes,  and  Glossarial  Index.  By  W.  W.  Skeat,  M.A.  Extra  fcap. 
Svo.     is.  6d. 


The  Vision  of  William  concerning  Piers  the  Plowman,  by- 
William  Langland.  Edited,  with  Notes,  by  W.  W.  Skeat,  M.A.  Third 
Edition.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  4^.  6d, 

Chancer.     I.  The  Prologue    to    the    Canterbury    Tales;    the 

Knightes  Tale ;  The  Nonne  Prestes  Tale.  Edited  by  R.  Morris,  Editor  of 
Specimens  of  Early  English,  &c.,  &c.  Fifty-first  Thousand.  Extra  fcap.  Svo. 
2S.  td. 

II.   The   Prioresses    Tale ;    Sir   Thopas ;    The   Monkes 

Tale  ;  The  Clerkes  Tale  ;  The  Squieres  Tale,  &c.  Edited  by  W.  W.  Skeat, 
M.A.     Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  4J.  6rf. 

III.   The  Tale  of  the  man  of  Latve ;    The    Pardoneres 

Tale ;  The  Second  Nonnes  Tale ;  The  Chanouns  Yemannes  Tale.  By  the 
same  Editor.     Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  4J.  dd. 

Spenser  s  Faery  Queene.     Books  I  and  II.     Designed  chiefly 

for  the  use  of  Schools.  With  Introduction,  Notes,  and  Glossary.  By  G.  W. 
Kitchin,  M.A. 

Book  I.     Tenth  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  2s.  6d. 
Book  II.     Sixth  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  2S.  6d. 

Hooker.     Ecclesiastical  Polity,   Book    I.     Edited    by    R.  W. 

Church,  M.A.     Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  2s. 
Marknve  and   Greene.     Marlowe's    Tragical  History  of  Dr. 

Faust  US,  and  Greene  s  Honourable  History  of  Friar  Bacon  and  Friar  Bungay. 
Edited  by  A.  W.  Ward,  M.A.     1S7S.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  5.r.  dd. 

Marlowe.  Edward  //.  With  Introduction,  Notes^  &c.  By 
O.  W.  Tancock,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  is. 


1 6  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 

Shakespeare.     Select  Plays.     Edited  by  W.  G.  Clark,  M.A., 
and  W.  Aldis  Wright,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  stiff  covers. 

I.  The  Merchant  of  Venice.     \s. 

II.  Richard  the  Second.     i.f.  dd. 

III.  Macbeth.     \s.  6d. 

IV.  Hamlet.     2s. 

Edited  by  W.  Aldis  Wright,  M.A.     Extra    fcap.   8vo. 


stiff  covers. 

V.  The  Tempest,     is.  6d. 

VI.  As  You  Like  It.     is.  6d. 

VII.  Julius  Caesar.     2s. 

VIII.  Richard  the  Third.     2j.  6d. 

IX.  King  Lear.     is.  6d. 

X.  A  Midsummer  Night's  Dream,     is.  6d. 

XI.  Coriolanus.     2s.  6d. 

XII.  Henry  the  Fifth.     2s. 

XIII.  Twelfth  Night.     In  the  Press. 

Bacon.     I.  Advancement  of  Learnhig.     Edited  by  W.  Aldis 

Wright,  M.A.     Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  4^.  dd. 

II.   The  Essays.     With    Introduction   and    Notes.     By 

J.  R.  Thursfield,  M.A.     In  Preparation. 

Milton.     I.  Areopagitica.    With  Introduction  and  Notes.     By 

J.  W.  Hales,  M.A.     Third  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  3^. 

II.  Poems.     Edited  by  R.  C.   Browne,   M.A.     2  vols. 

Fifth  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  ds.  dd. 

Sold  separately.  Vol.  I.  4J. ;  Vol.  II.  3^, 

In  paper  covers  : — 

Lycidas,  ^d.         L'Allegro,  id.         II  Penseroso,  ^d.         Comus,  (>d. 

Samson  Agonistes,  6d. 

III.  Samson  Agonistes.     Edited  with  Introduction  and 

Notes  by  John  Churton  Collins.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  stiff  covers,  is. 

Bunyan.     I.   The  Pilgrim's  Progress,  Grace  Aboitnding,  Rcla- 

tioji  of  the  Imprisonment  of  Mr.  John  Bitnyan.     Edited,  with  Biographical 
Introduction  and  Notes,  by  E.  Venables,  M.A.     1879.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  5^. 

II.    Holy  War,  &-c.     Edited    by    E.   Venables,    M.A. 


In  the  Press. 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.  17 

Dryden.     Select  Poems.     Stanzas   on   the    Death   of  OHver 

Cromwell;  Astrrea  Redux;  Annus  Mirabilis ;  Absalom  and  Achitophel ; 
Religio  Laici ;  The  Hind  and  the  Panther.  Edited  by  W.  D.  Christie,  M.A. 
Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  3J.  6a'. 

Locke's  Conduct  of  the  Understanding.     Edited,  with  Intro- 
duction, Notes,  &c.,  by  T.  Fowler,  M.A.  Second  Edition.  Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2j. 

Addison.     Selections  from   Papers    in   the   Spectator.     With 

Notes.     By  T,  Arnold,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  /^s.  6d. 

Pope.   With  Introduction  and  Notes.   By  Mark  Pattison,  B.D. 
I.    Essay  on  Man,     Sixth  Edition.     Extra  fcap.    8vo. 


II.  Satires  and  Epistles.     Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap. 

8vo.  2S. 

Parnell.     The  Hermit.     Paper  covers,  id. 

Johnson.     I.  Rasselas ;  Lives  of  Pope  and  Dryden.     Edited 

by  Alfred  Milnes,  B.A.  (London).     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  4^-.  dd. 

II.    Vanity  of  Human  Wishes.     With  NoteSj  by  E.  J. 

Payne,  M.A.     Paper  covers,  i,d. 

Gray.     Elegy  and  Ode  on  Etoji  College.     Paper  covers,  2d. 

Goldsmith.     The  Deserted  Village.     Paper  covers,  id. 

Coxvpcr.     Edited,  with    Life,    Introductions,   and   Notes,   by 

H.  T.  Griffith,  B.A. 

I.  The  Didactic  Poems  of  1782,  with  Selections  from  the 

Minor  Pieces,  A.D.  1779-1783.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  3J-. 

II.   The  Task,  with  Tirocinium,  and  Selections  from  the 


Minor  Poems,  A.D.  1 7S4-1 799.     Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  3,^. 

Burke.     Select  Works.     Edited,  with  Introduction  and  Notes, 

by  E.  J.  Payne,  M.A. 

I.   Thoughts  on  the  Present  Discontents ;  the  two  Speeches 

on  Afiterica.     Second  Edition.     Extra  fcaj^.  Svo.  4^.  ()d. 

II.  Reflections  on  the  Fre?ich  Revolution.    Second  Edition. 

Extra  fcap.  Svo.  ^s. 

III.  Four  Letters  on  the  Proposals  for  Peace  with  the 

Regicide  Directory  of  France.    Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  6^. 
[9]  C 


1 8  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 


Keats.   Hyperion,  Book  I.   With  Notes  by  W.  T.  Arnold,  B.A. 

Paper  covers,  ^d. 

Scott.     Lay  of  the  Last  Minstrel.     Introduction  and  Canto  I, 

with  Preface  and  Notes  by  W.  Minto,  M.A.     Paper  covers,  dd. 


II.    LATIN. 

An  Elementary  Latin  Grammar.     By  John  B.  Allen,  M.A. 

Third  Edition,  Revised  and  Corrected.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2j.  6d. 

A  First  Latin  Exercise  Book.     By  the  same  Author.     Fourth 

Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s.  6d. 

A   Second  Latin  Exercise  Book.     By  the  same  Author.     Ln 

the  Press. 

Reddenda  Minora,  or  Easy  Passages  for  Unseen  Translation 

for  the  use  of  Lower  Forms.     Composed  and  selected  by  C.  S.  Jerram,  M.A. 
Extra  fcap.  \s.  dd. 

Anglice  Reddenda,  or  Easy  Extracts,  Latin  and   Greek,  for 

Unseen  Translation.     By  C.  S.  Jerram,  M.A.     Third  Edition,  Revised  and 
Enlarged.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2S.  6d. 

Passages  for  Translation  into  Latin.     For  the  use  of  Passmen 

and   others.     Selected  by  J.  Y.  Sargent,  M.A.     Fifth  Edition.     Extra  fcap. 
Svo.  2J.  6i/. 

First  Latin  Reader.     By  T.  J.  Nunns,  M.A.     Third  Edition. 

Extra  fcap.  Svo.  2s. 

Caesar.     The  Commentaries  (for  Schools).     With  Notes  and 

Maps.     By  Charles  E.  Moberly,  M.A. 

Part  I.   The  Gallic  War.     Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  /{s.  6d. 

Part  II.   The  Civil  War.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  3s.  6d. 

The  Civil  War.     Book  I.     Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  2s. 

Cicero.    Selection  of  interesting  and  descriptive  passages.   With 

Notes.     By  Henry  Walford,  M.A.     In  three  Parts.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  4.^.  (>d. 
Each  Part  separately,  limp,  i.f.  ()d. 

Part  I.       Anecdotes  from  Grecian  and  Roman  History.     Third  Edition. 
Part  II.     Omens  and  Dreams:  Beauties  of  Nature.     Third  Edition. 
Part  III.  Rome's  Rule  of  her  Provinces.     Third  Edition. 

De  Amicitia  and  De  Senectute.     With  Notes.     By  W. 


Heslop,  M.A.     In  the  Press, 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.  19 

Cicero.     Selected  Letter's  (for  Schools).     With  Notes.     By  the 

late  C.  E.  Piichard,    M.A.,  and   E.  R.    Bernard,    M.A,      Second   Edition. 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  y. 

Select  Orations  (for  Schools).    In  Verrem  I.    De  Imperio 

Gn.  Pompeii.    ProArchia.   Philippica  IX.  With  Notes.   By  J.  R.  King,  M.A. 
Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s.  6a'. 

Cornelius  Nepos.     With  Notes.     By  Oscar  Browning,  M.A. 

Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s.  6d. 

Livy.     Selections  (for  Schools).     With  Notes  and  Maps.     By 

H.  Lee-Wamer,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.    In  Parts,  limp,  each  \s.  6d. 

Part  I.      The  Caudine  Disaster.  ^ 

Part  II.    Hannibal's  Campaign  in  Italy. 
Part  III.  The  Macedonian  War. 

Livy.     Books  V-VII.     With    Introduction   and   Notes.     By 

A.  R.  Cluer,  B.A.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  y.  6d. 

Ovid.     Selections  for  the  use  of  Schools.    With  Introductions 

and  Notes,  and  an  Appendix  on  the  Roman  Calendar.     By  W.  Ramsay,  M.A. 
Edited  by  G.  G.  Ramsay,  M.A.     Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  5^.  6d. 

Pliny.     Selected  Letters  (for  Schools).     With  Notes.     By  the 

late  C.  E.  Prichard,  M.A.,  and  E.  R.  Bernard,  M.A.    Second  Edition.    Extra 
fcap.  Svo.  3^. 


Catulli  Veronensis  Liber.     Iterum  recognovit,  apparatum  cri- 

ticum  prolegomena  appendices  addidit,  Robinson  Ellis,  A.M.     1S78.    Demy 
Svo.  i6s. 

A  Commentary  on  Catidlus.     By  Robinson  Ellis,  M.A. 


1S76.     Demy  Svo.   16^. 

Veronensis   Carmijia  Seleeta,  secundum    recognitionem 

Robinson  Ellis,  A.M.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  is.  6d. 

Cicero  de  Oratore.     With  Introduction  and  Notes.     By  A.  S. 

Wilkins,  M.A. 

Book  I.  1879.  Svo.  6s.         Book  II.  1881.  Svo.  ^s. 

Philippic  Orations.     With  Notes.     By  J.  R.  King,  M.A. 

Second  Edition.     1879.     Svo.  \qs.  6d. 

Select  Letters.     With  English  Introductions,  Notes,  and 

Appendices.   By  Albert  Watson,  M.A.    Third  Edition.  1881.    Demy  Svo.  iSj. 

C  2 


20  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 

Cicero.    Select  Letters.     Text.     By  the  same  Editor.    Second 

Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  45. 

Cicero  pro  Chtentio.     With  Introduction  and  Notes.     By  W. 

Ramsay,  MA.     Edited  by  G.  G.  Ramsay,  M.A.    Second  Edition.   Extra  fcap. 
8vo.  3^-.  6d. 

Horace.  With  a  Commentary.  Volume  I.    The  Odes,  Carmen 

Seculare,  and  Epodes.      By  Edward  C.  Wickham,  M.A.      Second  Edition. 
1877,     Demy  Svo.   \2s. 

A  reprint  of  the  above,  in  a  size  suitable  for  the  use 

of  Schools.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  5^.  dd. 

Livy,  Book  I.     With   Introduction,   Historical  Examination, 

and  Notes.     By  J.  R.  Seeky,  M.A.     Second  Edition.     1881.     Svo.  65-. 

Ovid.     P.  Ovidii  Nasonis  Ibis.     Ex  Novis  Codicibus  edidit, 

Scholia  Vetera  Commentarium  cum  Prolegomenis  Appendice  Indice  addidit, 
R.  Ellis,  A.M.     Demy  Svo.  10s.  (xi. 

Persiiis.     The  Satires.   With  a  Translation  and  Commentary. 

By  John  Conington,'  M.A.      Edited  by  Henry  Nettleship,  M.A.      Second 
Edition.     1874.     Svo.  Is.  6d. 

Plaiitus.     The  Trinummus.     With  Notes  and  Introductions. 

Intended  for  the  Higher  Forms  of  Public  Schools.     By  C.  E.  Freeman,  M.A., 
and  A.  Sloman,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  3^-. 

Sallust.     With  Introduction  and  Notes.     By  W.  W.  Capes, 

M.A.     In  the  Press. 

Tacitus.     The  Annals.     Books   I-VI.     Edited,   with    Intro- 
duction and  Notes,  by  H.  Furneaux,  M.A.     Svo.  i8.f. 

Vergil:    Suggestions  hitrodnctory  to  a  Study  of  the  Aeneid. 

By  H.  Nettleship,  M.A.     Svo.  sewed,  \s,  dd. 

Vergil,  Ancient  Lives  of.     With  an  Essay  on  the  Poems  of 

Vergil,  in  connection  with  his  Life  and  Times.     By  H.  Nettleship,  M.A.  Svo. 
sewed,  is. 

Virgil.     With  Introduction  and  Notes.     By  T.  L.  Papillon, 

MA.     Two  vols,  crown  Svo.   \os.  6d. 


Nettleship  (//.,  M.A.).     The  Roman  Satura:  its  original  form 

in  connection  with  its  literary  development.     Svo.  sewed,  \s. 

Papillon  {T.  L.,  M.A.).     A  Manual  of  Comparative  Philology. 

Third  Edition,  Revised  and  Corrected.     1S82.  Crown  Svo.  ds. 

Pinder  [North,  M.A.).     Selections  from  the  less  known  Latin 

Poets.     1869.     Demy  Svo.  i^s. 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD/  21 


Sellar  ( W.  V.,  M.A.).  Roman  Pods  of  the  Augustan  Age. 
Virgil.  By  William  Young  Sellar,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Humanity  in  the 
University  of  Edinburgh.    New  Edition.    1883.    Crown  8vo.  9J. 

Roman  Poets  of  tJie  Republic.     New  Edition,  Revised 


and  Enlarged.     1881.     8vo.  14J. 

WordsivortJi  {J.,  M.A.).     Fragments  and  Specimens  of  Early 

Latin.     With  Introductions  and  Notes.    1874.    8vo.  \Ss, 


III.     GREEK. 

^  Greek  Primer,  for  the  use  of  beginners  in  that  Language. 

By  the  Right  Rev.  Charles  Wordsworth,  D.C.L.  Seventh  Edition.  Extra  fcap. 
8vo.  IS.  6d. 

Graccae  Grammaticae  Rndimenta  in  usum  Scholarum.     Auc- 

tore  Carolo  Wordsworth.  D.C.L.     Twentieth  Edition,  1882.     i2mo.  4J. 

A  Greek-English  Lexicon,  abridged  from  Liddell  and  Scott's 

4to.  edition,  chiefly  for  the  use  of  Schools.  Nineteenth  Edition.  Carefully 
revised  throughout.     1881.     Square  i2mo.  12s.  6d. 

Greek  Verbs,  Irrcgtdar  and  Defective ;  their  forms,  meaning, 

and  quantity ;  embracing  all  the  Tenses  used  by  Greek  writers,  with  references 
to  the  passages  in  which  they  are  found.  By  W.  Veitch.  Fourth  Edition. 
Crown  8vo.   los.  6d. 

The  Elements  of  Greek  Accentiiation  (for  Schools) :    abridged 

from  his  larger  work  by  H.  W.  Chandler,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  ^s.  6d. 

A  Series  of  Graduated  Greek  Readers: — 

First  Greek  Reader.    By  W.  G.  Rushbrooke,  M.L.     Second 

Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s.  6d. 

Second  Greek  Reader.     By  A.  M.  Bell,  M.A.     Extra  fcap. 

8vo.  is.  6d. 

Fourth  Greek  Reader ;  being  Specimens  of  Greek  Dialects. 

With  Introductions  and  Notes.     By  W.  W.  Merry,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  Svo. 
4J.  dd. 

Fifth  Greek  Reader.     Part  I.     Selections  from  Greek  Epic 

and  Dramatic  Poetry,  with  Introductions  and  Notes,     By  Evelyn  Abbott^ 
M.A.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  4^.  dd. 

Part  II.     By  the  same  Editor.     In  Preparation. 

The  Golden  Treasury  of  Ancient  Greek  Poetry:  being  a  Col- 
lection of  the  finest  passages  in  the  Greek  Classic  Poets,  with  Introductory 
Notices  and  Notes.    By  R  S.  Wright,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  Sj.  dd. 


22  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 


A  Golden  Treasury  of  Greek  Prose,  being  a  Collection  of  the 

finest  passages  in  the  principal  Greek  Prose  Writers,  with  Introductory  Notices 
and  Notes.  By  R.  S.  Wright,  M.A.,  and  J.  E.  L.  Shadwell,  M.A.  Extra  fcap. 
8vo.  /fj.  6^. 

Aeschylus.     Prometheus  Bound  (for  Schools).     With  Introduc- 
tion and  Notes,  by  A.  O.  Prickard,  M.A.   Second  Edition.   Extra  fcap.  8vo.  zs. 

Agamemnon.     With  Introduction  and  Notes,  by  Arthur 

Sidgwick,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  3J. 

Choephoroe.     With  Introduction  and  Notes  by  the  same 

Editor.     Preparing. 

Aristophanes.     In  Single  Plays.     Edited,  with  English  Notes, 

Introductions,  &c.,  by  W.  W.  Merry,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo. 

I.  The  Clouds,  Second  Edition,  2s. 
II.  The  Acharnians,  2j, 
III.  The  Frogs,  25. 

Other  Plays  will  follow. 

Cebes.     Tabula.     With    Introduction   and   Notes.     By  C.  S. 

Jerram,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2J-.  dd. 

Euripides.     Alcestis  (for  Schools).     By  C.  S.  Jerram,  M.A. 

Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s.  6d. 

Helena.     Edited,  with  Introduction,  Notes,  and  Critical 

Appendix,  for  Upper  and  Middle  Forms.  By  C.  S.  Jerram,  M.A.  Extra 
fcap.  8vo.  3J. 

Herodotus,  Selections  from.    Edited,  with  Introduction,  Notes, 

and  a  Map,  by  W.  W.  Merry,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  25.  6d. 

Homer.     Gdyssey,   Books   I-XII   (for   Schools).     By  W.  W. 

Merry,  M.A.    Twenty-seventh  Thousand.   Extra  fcap.  8vo.  /[s.  61/. 
Book  II,  separately,  \s.  6d. 

Odyssey,   Books   XIII-XXIV    (for    Schools).     By   the 

same  Editor.    Second  Edition.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  5^. 

Iliad,  Book  I   (for  Schools).     By  D.  B.  Monro,  M.A. 

Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s. 


-  Iliad,  Books  I-XII  (for  Schools).  By  D.  B.  Monro,  M.A. 

Nearly  ready. 

—  Iliad,  Books  VI   and  XXI.      With    Introduction    and 
Notes.  By  Herbert  Hailstone,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  \s.  6d.  each. 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.  23 

Lucian.      Vera   Historia   (for   Schools).     By   C.    S.   Jerram, 

M.A.    Second  Edition.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  \s.  6d. 

Plato.      Selections   (for   Schools).      Edited,   with    Notes,   by 

J.  Purves,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  6j.  (td. 

Sophocles.     In    Single   Plays,  with  English   Notes,   &c.     By 

Lewis  Campbell,  M.A.,  and  Evelyn  Abbott,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  limp. 

Oedipus  Tyrannus,    Philoctetes.    New  and  Revised  Edition,  2s.  each. 

Oedipus  Coloneus,  Antigone,   \s.  ^d.  each. 

Ajax,         Electra,         Trachiniae,   2s.  each. 

Oedipjis   Rex:    Dindorfs    Text,    with    Notes    by    the 


present  Bishop  of  St.  David's.     Ext.  fcap.  Svo.  limp,  is.  6d. 

Theocritus   (for   Schools).     With    Notes.     By   H.  Kynaston, 

M.A.  (late  Snow).     Third  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  4^-.  6d. 

Xenophoii.     Easy  Selections,     (for  Junior  Classes).     With  a 

Vocabulary.  Notes,  and  Map.     By  J.  S.  Phillpotts,  B.C.L.,  and  C.  S.  Jerram, 
M.A.     Third  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  3^.  bd. 

Selections  (for  Schools).     With  Notes  and   Maps.     By 

J.  S.  Phillpotts,  B.C.L.     Fourth  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  y.  6d. 

Anabasis,  Book  II.     With  Notes  and  Map.     By  C.  S. 

Jerram,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.   2s, 

Cyropaedia,  Books  IV  and  V.     With  Introduction  and 


Notes  by  C.  Bigg,  D.D.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  2s.  6d. 


Aristotle's  Politics.  By  W.  L.  Newman,  M.A.  [In  preparation.'] 

Aristotelian  Studies.  I.  On  the  Structure  of  the  Seventh 
Book  of  the  Nicomachean  Ethics.  By  J.  C.  Wilson,  M.A.  1879.  Medium  Svo. 
stiff,  5^. 

Demosthenes  and  Aeschines.     The  Orations  of  Demosthenes 

and  ^.schines  on  the  Crown.     With   Introductory  Essays  and  Notes.     By 
G.  A.  Simcox,  M.A.,  and  W,  H.  Simcox,  M.A.     1872.  Svo.  12s. 

Geldart  {E.  M.,  B.A.).     The  Modern  Greek  Language  in  its 

relation  to  Ancient  Greek.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  4^-.  dd. 

Hicks  [E.  L.,  M.A.).  A  Manual  of  Greek  Historical  Inscrip- 
tions.   Demy  Svo.  los.  6d. 


24  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 

Homer.     Odyssey^  Books  I-XII.     Edited  with  English  Notes, 

Appendices,  etc.     By  W.  W.  Merry,  M.A.,  and  the  late  James  Riddell,  M.A. 
1876.  Demy  8vo.  \(is. 

A  Grammar  of  the  Homeric  Dialect.      By  D.  B.  Monro,  M.A. 

Demy  Svo.  \os.  6d. 

Sophocles.     The  Plays  and  Fragments.     With  English  Notes 

and  Introductions,  by  Lewis  Campbell,  M.A.    2  vols. 

Vol.  I.      Oedipus   Tyrannus.      Oedipus  Coloneus.      Antigone.       Second 
Edition.     1879.  Svo.  i6.f. 

Vol.  II.    Ajax.     Electra.     Trachiniae.     Philoctetes.     Fragments.       1881. 
Svo.  i6j. 

Sophocles.     The   Text    of  the    Seven   Plays.     By  the   same 

Editor.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  ^s.  (>d. 


IV.    PREWCH  AND   ITALIAN. 

Br  ache  fs  Etymological  Dictionary  of  the  French  Langitage. 
with  a  Preface  on  the  Principles  of  French  Etymology.  Translated  into 
English  by  G.  W.  Kitchin,  M.A.     Second  Edition.     Crown  Svo.  7.^.  dd. 

Brachefs    Historical    Grammar    of   the    French    Language. 

Translated  into  English  by  G.  W.  Kitchin,  M.A.     Fourth  Edition.     Extra 
fcap.  Svo.  y.  6d. 

L' Eloquence  de  la  Chaire  et  de  la  Tribune  Frangaises.     Edited 

by  Paul    Blouet,  B.A.   (Univ.  Gallic).      Vol.  I.    French   Sacred   Oratory. 
Extra  fcap.  Svo.  2^.  6d.    Just  Published. 


"Works  by  GEORGE  SAINTSBUBT,  M.A. 

Primer  of  French  Literature.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  is. 

Short  History  of  French  Literature.     Crown  Svo.  10s.  6d. 

Specimens  of  French  Literature,  from  Villon  to  Hugo.    Crown 
Svo.  9J. 

Corneille^s  Horace.     Edited,  with  Introduction  and  Notes,  by 

George  Saintsbury,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  2s.  6d. 

Beanmarchais''  LeBarbier  de  Seville.   Edited,  with  Introduction 

and  Notes,  by  Austin  Dobson.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  2s.  6d. 

Molih-e's  Les  Pr/cieuses  Ridicules.     Edited,  with  Introduction 

and  Notes,  by  Andrew  Lang,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  \s.  6d. 

Other  Plays  to  follow. 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.  25 


Edited  by  GITSTAVE  MASSON,  B.A. 

Corneilles  China,  and  Molieres  Les  Femmes  Savantes.     With 

Introduction  and  Notes.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  2s.  6d. 

Louis  XIV  and  his  Contemporaries  ;  as  described  in  Extracts 

from  the  best  Memoirs  of  the  Seventeenth  Century.  With  English  Notes, 
Genealogical  Tables,  &c.     Extra  fcajj.  Svo.  2s.  6d. 

Maistre,  Xavier  de.     Voyage  autonr  de  ma  Chambre.     Ourika, 

by  Mada7ne  de  Duras;  La  Dot  de  Suzette,  by  Fievce;  Les  Jumeaux  de 
I'Hotel  Corneille.  by^fl'w^;/^/^^,?/^/';  Mesaventures  d'un  Ecolier,  by  Rodolphe 
Topffer.    Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  2s.  6d. 

Molihe's  Les  Foiirberies   de   Scapin,   and    Racine's  Athalie. 

With  Voltaire's  Life  of  Moliere.     Extra  fcap.  Svo,  2^.  M. 

Racine's   Androviaqne,   and    Corneillc's  Le   Menteiir.      With 

Louis  Racine's  Life  of  his  Father.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  2s.  6d. 

Regnard's  Le  Joneiir,  and  Briieys  and  Palaprafs  Le  Grojideur. 

Extra  fcap.  Svo.  2s.  6d. 

Sevigmf,  Madame  de,  and  her  chief  Contemporaries,  Selections 

from  the  Correspondence  of.     Intended  more  especially  for  Girls'  Schools. 
Extra  fcap.  Svo.  },s. 


Dante.     Selections  from  the  Inferno.     With  Introduction  and 

Notes.     By  H.  B.  Cotterill,  B.A.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  4^.  6^. 

Tasso.     La  Gernscdemme  Liberata.     Cantos  i,  ii.     With  In- 
troduction and  Notes.     By  the  same  Editor.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  2^.  dd. 


V.    GERMAN. 

GERMAN  COURSE.     By  HERMATTW  LANGE. 

The  Germans  at  Home ;  a  Practical  Introduction  to  German 

Conversation,  with  an  Appendix  containing  the  Essentials  of  German  Grammar. 
Second  Edition.     Svo.  2s.  dd. 

The  German  Manual ;  a  German  Grammar,  Reading  Book, 

and  a  Handbook  of  German  Conversation.     Svo.  7^.  (id. 


26  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 

Grammar  of  the  German  Language.     8vo,  3^.  6d. 

This  '  Grammar '  is  a  reprint  of  the  Grammar  contained  in  'The  German  Manual,' 
and,  in  this  separate  form,  is  intended  for  the  use  of  Students  who  wish  to  make 
themselves  acquainted  with  German  Grammar  chiefly  for  the  purpose  of  being 
able  to  read  German  books. 

German  Composition ;  A  Theoretical  and  Practical  Guide  to 

the  Art  of  Translating  English  Prose  into  German.     8vo.  4^.  dd. 


Lessing's  Laokoon.     With   Introduction,  English  Notes,  etc. 

By  A.  Hamann,  Phil.  Doc,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  4J.  6(/. 

Schiller  s  Wilhelm  Tell.     Translated  into  English  Verse  by 
E.  Massie,  M.A.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  5^. 


Also,  Edited  by  C.  A.  BTJCHHEIM,  PMl.  Doc. 

Goethe's  Egmont.  With  a  Life  of  Goethe,  &c.    Third  Edition, 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  y. 

Lphigenie  anf  Tauris.     A  Drama.     With  a  Critical  In- 


troduction and  Notes.    Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  y. 
Lessing''s  Minna  vo7t  BarnJielm.     A  Comedy.     With  a  Life 

of  Lessing,  Critical  Analysis,  Complete  Commentary,  &c.     Fourth  Edition. 
Extra  fcap.  Svo.   3J.  dd. 

Nathan    der    Weise.     With    Introduction,    Notes,   etc. 


Extra  fcap.  Svo.  4J.  dd. 

Schiller  s  Historische  Skizzen  ;  Egmont" s  Leben  lutd  Tod,  and 

Belagerung  von  Antwerj^eti.    Second  Edition.    Extra  fcap.  Svo.  25.  dd. 

Wilhelm  Tell.  With  a  Life  of  Schiller ;  an  his- 
torical and  critical  Introduction,  Arguments,  and  a  complete  Commentary. 
Sixth  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.  3.?.  6d. 


Modern  German  Reader.     A  Graduated  Collection  of  Prose 

Extracts  from  Modern  German  vk'riters : — 

Part  I.     With   English   Notes,   a    Grammatical   Appendix,   and   a   complete 
Vocabulary.   Third  Edition.   Extra  fcap.  Svo.  2s.  6d. 

Parts  II  and  III  in  Preparation. 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.  27 


VI.    MATHEMATICS,   PHYSICAL    SCIENCE,  &c. 

By  LEWIS  HENSLEY,  M.A. 

Figures  made  Easy :  a  first  Arithmetic  Book.     (Introductory 

to  '  The  Scholar's  Arithmetic.')     Crown  8vo.  6(/. 

Anszvers   to   the  Examples  in  Figures  made  Easy,  together 

■with  two  thousand  additional  Examples  formed  from  the  Tables  in  the  same, 
with  Answers.     Crown  8vo.  ij-. 

The  Scholar's  Arithmetic:   with  Answers  to  the  Examples. 

Crown  8vo.  4^.  dd. 

The  Scholar's  Algebra.     An  Introductory  work  on  Algebra. 

Crown  Svo.  ^s.  6d. 


Baynes  {R.  E.,  M.A.).     Lessons   on   Thermodynamics.     1878, 
Crown  Svo.  7^.  6</. 

Clarke  {Col.  A.  R.,C.B.,R.E.).    Geodesy.    1880.    Svo.  12s.  6d. 
Chambers   [G.   F.,  F.R.A.S.).     A    Handbook    of  Descriptive 

Astronomy.     Third  Edition.     1877.    Demy  8vo.  28^-. 

Donkin  [W.  F.,  M.A.,  F.R.S.).    Acoustics.    1870.    Crown  8vo. 

p.  6d. 

Galton  {Douglas,  C.B.,  F.R.S.).     The  Construction  of  Healthy 

D^velUngs  ;  namely  Houses,  Hospitals,  Barracks,  Asylums,  &c.     Demy  Svo. 
lOJ.  dd. 

Hamilton  {R.  G.  C),  and  J.  Ball.     Book-keeping.     New  and 

enlarged  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  limp  cloth,  2s. 

Har court  {A.  G.    Vernon,  M.A.),  and  H.  G,  Madan,  M.A. 

Exercises   in   Practical   Chemistry.     Vol.  I.   Elementary  Exercises.      Third 
Edition.     Crown  8vo.  <^s. 

Maclarett   {Archibald).     A    System   of  Physical   Education : 

Theoretical  and  Practical.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  7^'.  6(/. 

Madan   {H.   G.,   M.A.).       Tables    of   Qualitative    Analysis. 

Large  4to.  paper,  4J-.  6d. 

Maxzvell  {jf.  Clerk,  M.A.,  F.R.S.).    A  Treatise  on  Electricity 

and Magrutism.     Second  Edition.     2  vols.  Demy  Svo.  i/.  lis.  dd. 

An   Elementary    Treatise    on    Electricity.     Edited    by 

William  Garnett,  M.A.     Demy  Svo.  7^'.  dd. 


2  8  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 

Minchm  {G.  M.,   M.A.).     A    Treatise  on    Statics.     Second 

Edition,  Revised  and  Enlarged.    1879.    8vo.  14J. 

Uniplauar  Kinematics  of  Solids  and  Fluids.    Crown  8vo. 


7^-.  6d. 

Rolleston  [G.,  M.D.,  F.R.S.).  Forms  of  Animal  Life.  Illus- 
trated by  Descriptions  and  Drawings  of  Dissections.  A  New  Edition  in  the 
Press. 

Smyth.     A   Cycle  of  Celestial  Objects.      Observed,   Reduced, 

and  Discussed  by  Admiral  W.  H.  Smyth,  R.N.  Revised,  condensed,  and 
greatly  enlarged  by  G.  F.  Chambers,  F.R.A.S.     1881.  8vo.    2\s. 

Stezvart  {Balfour,  LL.D.,  F.R.S.).     A  Treatise  on  Heat,  with 

numerous  Woodcuts  and  Diagrams.  Fourth  Edition.  1881.  Extra  fcap.  8vo. 
7^.  dd. 

Story-Maskelyne  (M.  H.  N.,  M.A.).    Crystallography.     In  the 

Press. 

Vernon- Harcourt  {L.  F.,  Af.A.).     A   Treatise  on  Rivers  and 

Canals,  relating  to  the  Control  and  Improvement  of  Rivers,  and  the  Design, 
Construction,  and  Development  of  Canals,  2  vols.  (Vol.  I,  Text.  Vol.  II, 
Plates.)     8vo.  2\s. 

Watson  {H.  W.,  M.A.).  A  Treatise  on  the  Kinetic  Theory 
of  Gases.     1876.  8vo,  2^.  6d. 

Watson  (H.  W.,  M.A.),  and  Burbnry  {S.  H.,  M.A.).  A  Trea- 
tise on  the  Application  of  Generalised  Coordinates  to  the  Kinetics  of  a  Material 
System.     1879.  8vo.  6j. 

Williamson   (A.    W.,^   Phil.   Doc,   F.R.S.).      Chemistry   for 

Students.     A  new  Edition,  with  Solutions.     1873.  Extra  fcap.  8vo.  8.f.  ^d. 

VII.  HISTORY. 

Finlay  {George,  LL.D.).  A  History  of  Greece  from  its  Con- 
quest by  the  Romans  to  the  present  time,  B.C.  146  to  a.d.  1864.  Anew 
Edition,  revised  throughout,  and  in  part  re-written,  with  considerable  additions, 
by  the  Author,  and  edited  lay  H.  F.  Tozer,  M.A.     1877.    7  vols.  8vo.  3/.  los. 

Freeman   {E.A.,  M.A.).     A    Short   History  of  the   Norman 

Conqtiest  of  England.    Second  Edition.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s.()d. 


A  Llistory  of  Greece.     In  preparation. 

George  {H.  B.,  M.A.).  Genealogical  Tables  illnstrative  of  Modern 

History.     Second  Edition,  Revised  and  Enlarged.     Small  4to.   1 2^. 

Hodgkin  {T.).     Italy  and  her  Invaders,  A.D.  376-476.     Illus- 
trated with  Plates  and  Maps.     2  vols.  Svo.  \l.  12s. 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.  29 


Kitchi7t[G.  W.,  M.A.).   A  History  of  France.  With  numerous 

Maps,  Plans,  and  Tables.  In  Three  Volumes.  1873-77.  Crown  8vo.  each 
10s.  6d. 

Vol.  I.  Second  Edition.     Dowii  to  the  Year  1453. 
Vol.  2.  From  1453-1624. 
Vol.  3.  From  1624-1793. 

Payne  {E.  J.,  M.A.).     A    History  of  the    United   States   of 

Af?ierica.     In  the  Press. 

Ranke  [L.  von).     A  History  of  England,  principally  in  the 

Seventeenth  Century.  Translated  by  Resident  Members  of  the  University  of 
Oxford,  under  the  superintendence  of  G.  W.  Kitchin,  M.A.,  and  C.  W.  Boase, 
M.A.     1875.    6  vols.  8vo.  3/.  IS. 

Rawlinsoft  {George,  M.A.).     A  Manual  of  Ancient  History. 

Second  Edition.    Demy  8vo.  \\s. 

Select  Charters  and  other  Illustrations  of  English  Constitutional 

History,  from  the  Earliest  Times  to  the  Reign  of  Edward  I.  Arranged  and 
edited  by  W.  Stubbs,  M.A.     Fourth  Edition.^    1881.     Crown  8vo.  Sj-.  6r/. 

Stubbs  (  W.,  D.D.).     The  Constitutional  History  of  England^ 

in  its  Origin  and  Development.     Library  Edition.    3  vols,  demy  8vo.  2/.  Sj. 
Also  in  3  vols,  crown  Svo.  price  \is.  each. 

We  lies  ley.     A   Selection  from    the  Despatches,    Treaties,   and 

other  Papers  of  the  Marquess  Wellesley,  K.G.,  during  his  Government 
of  India.     Edited  by  S.  J.  Owen,  M.A.     1877.     Svo.  1/.  4J-. 

Wellington.  A  Selection  from  the  Despatches,  Treaties,  and 
other  Papers  relating  to  India  of  Field-Marshal  the  Duke  of  Wellington,  K.G. 
Edited  by  S.  J.  Owen,  M.A.     1880.  8vo.  24J. 

A   History  of  British  India.     By  S.J.Owen,  M.A.,  Reader 

in  Indian  History  in  the  University  of  Oxford.     In  preparation. 


VIII.  LAW. 

Alberici  Gentilis,  LCD.,  I.C.  Professoris  Regii,  De  lure  Belli 

Libri   Tres.     Edidit  Thomas  Erskine  Holland,    LCD.     1877.     Small  4to. 
half  morocco,  2\s. 

Anson  {Sir  William  R.,  Bart.,  D.C.L.).     Principles   of  the 

English  Laiv  of  Contract,  and  of  Agency  iti  its  Relation  to  Contract.     Second 
Edition.     Demy  Svo.  \os.  6d. 

Bentham    {Jeremy).      An    Introdttction    to    the   Principles   of 
Morals  and  Legislation.     Crown  Svo.  6.r.  dd. 


30  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 

Digby  {Kenelni  E.,  M.A.).     An  Introduction  to  the  History  of 

the  Law  of  Real  Property,  with  original  Authorities.     Second  Edition.    1876. 
Crown  8vo.  "js.  6d. 

Gaii  Institutiomim  Juris  Civilis  Cominejitarii  Quattuor ;  or, 
Elements  of  Roman  Law  by  Gains.  With  a  Translation  and  Commentary 
by  Edward  Poste,  M.A.     Second  Edition.     1875.     8vo.  i8j-. 

Hall  (  W.  E.,  M.A.).     International  Lazv.     Second  Edition. 

Demy  8vo.  21s. 

Holland  (T.  E.,  D.C.L.).     The  Elements  of  Jurisprudence. 

Second  Edition.     Demy  8vo.  \os.  6d. 

Imperatoris  histiniani  Institutiomim  Libri   Quattuor ;    with 

Introductions,  Commentary,  Excursus  and  Translation.   By  J.  B.  Moyle,  B.C.L., 
M.A.     2  vols.     8vo.  2i.f. 

Justinian,   The  Institutes   of,  edited    as   a  recension  of  the 

Institutes  of  Gaius,  by  Thomas  Erskine   Holland,  D.C.L.    Second  Edition, 
1881.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  55. 

Justinian,  Select  Titles  from  the  Digest  of   By  T.  E,  Holland, 

D.C.L.,  and  C.  L.  Shadwell,  B.C.L.     8vo.  i^s. 

Also  sold  in  Parts,  in  paper  covers,  as  follows  : — 

Part  I.  Introductory  Titles.     2s.  6d.  Part  II.  Family  Law.     is. 

Part  III.  Property  Law.     2s.  6d.       Part  IV.  Law  of  Obligations  (No.  1).     3s.  6rf. 

Part  IV.  Law  of  Obligations  (No.  2).     4s.  6d. 

Markby  {W.,  M.A).  Elements  of  Law  considered  with  refer- 
ence to  Principles  of  General  Jurisprudence.  Second  Edition,  with  Supple- 
ment.    1874.     Crown  8vo.  7s.  6 J.     Supplement  separately,  2s. 


IX.     MENTAL  AND  MORAL  PHILOSOPHY. 

Bacon's  Novum  Organum.     Edited,  with  English  Notes,  by 

G.  W.  Kitchin,  M.A.     1855.    8vo.  9J.  dd. 

Translated  by  G.  W.  Kitchin,  M.A.     1855.  8vo.  9^.  6d. 


Berkeley.     The    Works   of  George    Berkeley,   D.D.,   formerly 

Bishop  of  Cloyne;  including  many  of  his  writings  hitherto  unpublished. 
With  Prefaces,  Annotations,  and  an  Account  of  his  Life  and  Philosophy, 
by  Alexander  Campbell  Eraser,  M.A.   4  vols.     1871.    8vo.  2/.  iSj. 

The  Life,  Letters,  &c.     I  vol.    i6j. 

Selections   from.      With   an  Introduction    and    Notes. 

Yox  the  use  of  Students  in  the  Universities.  By  Alexander  Campbell  Eraser, 
LL.D.    Second  Edition.     Crown  8vo.  7^-.  dd. 


CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD.  31 

Fowler  ( 7^.,  M.A.).  The  Elements  of  Dediietive  Logic,  designed 
mainly  for  the  use  of  Junior  Students  in  the  Universities.  Eighth  Edition, 
with  a  Collection  of  Examples.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  y.  ()d. 

The  Eleinents  of  Inductive  Logic,  designed   mainly  for 

the  use  of  Students  in  the  Universities.   Fourth  Edition.   Extra  fcap.  8vo.  ds. 

Edited  by  T.  FOWLEB,  M.A. 

Bacon.     Novum  Orgamim.     With    Introduction,    Notes,   &c. 

1878.     8vo.  I4J-. 

Locke''s    Condjici    of  the    Understanding.      Second    Edition. 

Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s. 

Green  [T.  H.,  M.A.).     Prolegomena   to   Ethics.      Edited   by 

A.  C.  Bradley,  M.A.     Demy  8vo.  12s.  6d. 

Hegel.  The  Logic  of  Hegel ;  translated  from  the  Encyclo- 
paedia of  the  Philosophical  Sciences.  With  Prolegomena  by  William 
Wallace,  M.A.     1874.    8vo.  14^-. 

Lotze's  Logic,  in  Three  Books  ;  of  Thought,  of  Investigation, 

and  of  Knowledge.     English  Translation;   Edited  by  B.  Bosanquet,  MA., 
Fellow  of  University  College,  Oxford.  8vo.  cloth,  1 2j.  6a'.     Just  Published. 

Mctaphysic,    in   Three   Books;    Ontology,    Cosmology, 

and    Psychology.      English    Translation  ;    Edited    by    B.    Bosanquet,    M.A., 
Fellow  of  University  College,  Oxford.  8vo.  cloth,  1 2s.  6d.     Just  Published. 

Rogers  {J.E.  Thorold,  M.A.).  A  Matiual  of  Political  Economy^ 

for  the  use  of  Schools.     Third  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  4^-.  6t/. 

Smith's  Wealth  of  Nations.     A  new  Edition,  with  Notes,  by 

J.  E.  Thorold  Rogers,  M.A.     2  vols.     1880.  21s. 


X.     ART,  &c. 

Httllah  {John).      The    Qtltivatioji    of   the    Speaking     Voice. 

Second  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s.  6d. 

Ouseley  {Sir  F.  A.  Gore^  Bart.).     A    Treatise  on  Harmony. 

Third  Edition.     4to.  ioj. 

A   Treatise  on  Counterpoint,  Canon,  and  Fngne,  based 


upon  that  of  Cherubini.     Second  Edition.     4to.  ibs. 

—  A   Treatise  oji  Musical  Form  and  General  Composition. 


4to.  10  J. 

Robinson  [jf.  C,  F.S.A.).   A  Critical  Accoimt  of  the  Drazvijigs 

by  Michel  Angela  and  Rciffaello  in  the  University  Galleries,  Oxford.     1S70. 
Crown  8vo.  4^. 


32  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 

Ruskin  {John,  M.A.).    A  Cotirse  of  Lectures  on  Art,  delivered 

before  the  University  of  Oxford  in  Hilary  Term,  1870.     8vo.  6^. 

Troutbeck  {J.,  M.A.)  and R.  F.  Dale,  M.A .     A  Music  Primer 

(for  Schools).     Second  Edition.     Crown  Svo.  is.6d. 

Tyrwhitt{R.  St.  J.,  M.A.).     A   Handbook  of  Pictorial  Art. 

With  coloured  Illustrations,  Photographs,  and  a  chapter  on  Perspective  by 
A.  Macdonald.     Second  Edition.     1875.     Svo.  half  morocco,  iSj-. 

Vaux  [W.  S.  W.,  M.A.,  F.R.S.).     Catalogue  of  the  Castcllani 

Collection  of  Antiqtiities  in  the  University  Galleries,  Oxford.     Crown  8vo. 
stiff  cover,  is. 


LONDON:   HENRY  FROWDE, 

Oxford    University    Press  Warehouse,    Amen    Corner, 

OXFORD:   CLARENDON  PRESS  DEPOSITORY, 

116  High  Street. 


The  Delegates  of  the  Press  invite  suggestions  and  advice  from  aU  persons 
interested  in  educatioJi;  and  will  be  thankful  for  hints,  Sfc.  addressed  to  the 
Secretary  to  the  Delegates,  Clarendon  Press,  Oxford. 


1    1012  01093  4«1U 


Date  Due 

-^     -^ 

'i'!''        /]     '^ 

? 

^L^T***"*" 

lii»« 

^^,*«<eV«.^v* 

?^          ■ 

^I.M.lil.» 

i||» 

-. 

$) 

Pi   . 

'■44 
4m: 


,JV'>.'  ■''  '.V  *  ,'■.  , 


''  '■J\'<^i  .-,.;.■ 'T.J' -#;:.■':'    ;-. 


:i'':i;*i:;-;;:**£r  ;-v/^^-- 


■]^-'  '■l;i' 

'      ..   ■ 

^''^.      %*. 

.    ,  1   '• 

t    * 

,',<'■  ' 

^  .  ^. 

■  .!i;i; 

t    '1 

f 

9: 

■-  ,^, 

1-1'  v,i'r  ,,;;■.■.■-  ',  -:<!*„  ,  , .  , 

■  ■"/N'J'S,-"'  '.■■  ■■'■■■' 

'i';;'!;  '^l-^e-.-ir  •  !>■! '•■■'•■  -.,  '■ 

.        ,' ■      ''.        ->•:•    ■         ■■•,     • 


::M' 


'1 , 


.    ,'■  ■■'.■-'  •        .* 

>   .'■<   l:       '-If.'         >■;    v'j.  I   H 

•i:.'i''  v/  '■;-■■,■  ',. 


•  ,,"yii   ,-.'.•>  .^,.|,  ,c'<-r  ,• 
'i  •  11 1*  ■^f-x;'*'*;  '-^^  n'^.?  ..• . .    ■■ 

'' '^'i|  cf  ./=^''<;^^^eA'' . 

'i  .*.!.;  u4'bi^n..*f;^V:r  .>- 
.jpiUSi,.--.-,.*',. '•■;., 


