fi 

7 


4 DEC.  1941 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  Limited 

LONDON  . BOMBAY  . CALCUTTA 
MELBOURNE 

THE  MACMILLAN  COMPANY 

NEW  YORK  . BOSTON  . CHICAGO 
ATLANTA  . SAN  FRANCISCO 

THE  MACMILLAN  CO.  OF  CANADA,  Ltd. 


TORONTO 


\Fron  tispiece. 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


THE  RELIGIOUS  AND  POLITICAL  SYSTEM 
OF  THE  TO  RUB  A 


BY 

R.  E.  DENNETT 


AUTHOR  OF  “AT  THE  BACK  OF  THE  BLACK  MAN’S  MIND 


With  Illustrations 


MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  LIMITED 
ST.  MARTIN’S  STREET,  LONDON 
1910 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2016 


https://archive.org/details/nigerianstudiesoOOdenn 


PREFACE 


Administrators  and  missionaries  are  often 
blamed  for  adopting  methods  of  administration  or 
evangelising  which  we  all  know  are  not  suited  to  the 
uplifting  of  the  negro  race.  Destructive  criticism  of 
such  methods  is  easy,  and  in  this  case,  where  both  parties 
have  sincerely  done  their  best,  quite  unnecessary. 
The  construction  of  a correct  native  policy  is  much 
harder  to  build  up,  and  it  is  a question  whether  we  yet 
have  sufficient  data  to  work  with  any  certainty.  I 
have  been  very  much  struck  with  Dr.  Arthur  Keith’s 
first  series  of  Hunterian  lectures  on  the  “Anatomy 
and  Relationships  of  the  Negro  and  Negroid  Races.” 
There  he  expresses  the  opinion  that  before  further 
progress  can  be  made  in  anthropological  investigation 
it  will  be  necessary  to  revise  our  methods,  substitut- 
ing for  the  present  empirical  measurements  others 
founded  on  a more  certain  and  scientific  basis. 

In  the  following  pages  I have  approached  the  study 
of  the  native  from  a philosophical  (in  the  old-fashioned 
sense  of  the  word)  point  of  view. 

One  of  the  most  hopeful  signs  of  the  times  in 
Nigeria  is  that  natives  (who,  by  the  way,  owe  their 


PREFACE 


viii 

education  to  the  missionaries)  are  beginning  to  look 
upon  their  native  lore  in  a more  serious  light  than 
their  dear  old  masters  did.  Bishop  Johnson  gave  us 
a little  work  on  Yoruba  paganism  from  which  I quoted 
largely  in  At  the  Back  of  the  Black  Mans  Mind. 
Bishop  Phillips  wrote  a little  book  called  I fa.  The 
Rev.  Lijadu  has  given  us  If  a and  Orunanila.  Mr.  Sobo 
wrote  Arofa  odes  or  poems.  Dr.  Johnson  has  lectures 
on  Yoruba  history,  and  Mr.  John  O.  George  has 
written  a short  account  of  Yoruba  history.  Dr. 
Henry  Carr,  the  Chancellor  of  the  Diocese  of 
Equatorial  Africa,  a native  of  Egbaland,  is  an  author 
of  many  interesting  papers  and  keys  to  mathematical 
works.  Mr.  Adesola  is  now  engaged  in  writing  a 
most  interesting  account  of  Yoruba  Death  and  Burial 
Secret  Societies,  which  are  appearing  in  the 
Nigerian  Chronicle.  Mr.  Johnson  is  the  editor  of  this 
paper  which  is  doing  such  good  work  in  this  direction. 
Then  Mr.  Williams  and  Mr.  Jackson,  both  also 
Africans,  are  editors  of  the  Lagos  Standard  and  the 
Lagos  Record.  These  papers  can  be  seen  in  the 
Royal  Colonial  Institute.  In  other  lines  of  life  the 
colony  has  produced  many  distinguished  natives,  but  I 
have  only  mentioned  the  above  because  I am  now 
only  dealing  with  literature.  That  an  African  colony, 
not  yet  fifty  years  old,  should  have  produced  in  so 
short  a time  so  many  men  distinguished  in  letters  is  a 
very  hopeful  sign  for  its  future  and  speaks  for  itself. 

I am  indebted  to  so  many  for  help  in  producing  this 
little  work  that  it  is  difficult  for  me  to  know  how 
many  to  thank.  Captain  W.  H.  Beverley  has  kindly 


PREFACE 


IX 


supplied  me  with  the  little  map  which  will  at  a glance 
show  my  readers  where  Yorubaland  is. 

Mr.  H.  Dodd  took  the  photographs  of  the  fishermen 
and  hunters.  A native  photographer,  Mr.  Holm,  has 
supplied  the  rest. 

Dr.  Henry  Carr,  who  is  at  present  in  England,  has 
gone  through  the  proofs  with  me  and  corrected  as  many 
of  my  mistakes  in  spelling  native  names  as  he  has 
been  able,  which  adds  very  greatly  to  the  value  of  the 
work. 

As  1 have  to  leave  for  Africa  without  seeing  the 
final  proofs,  Mr.  T.  A.  Joyce  has  generously  promised 
to  undertake  this  arduous  task  for  me. 

And  away  yonder  in  Africa  are  many  to  whom  my 
thanks  are  due  for  their  hearty  co-operation  and 
patience,  among  whom  are  the  Forest  Rangers  Taylor 
and  Pellegrin,  the  priest  or  Babalawo,  Oliyitan,  the 
sons  of  Agbola  and  other  chiefs. 


* 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 

EXPLANATORY  CHAPTER  I 

CHAPTER  I 

A FEW  NOTES  ON  THE  HISTORY  OF  YORUBALAND  ....  6 

CHAPTER  II 

CREATION  AND  THE  SACRED  STONES  AT  IFE 17 

CHAPTER  III 

DEATH,  BURIAL,  AND  DEPARTED  SPIRITS  ORO,  EGUNGUN,  ETC.  . 28 

CHAPTER  IV 

THE  FOUR  GREAT  ESTATES  IN  THE  NATIVE  FORM  OF  GOVERN- 
MENT   60 

CHAPTER  V 

JAKUTA.  THE  FOUR  WINDS 65 


Xll 


CONTENTS 


CHAPTER  VI 

PAGE 

ODUDUA  AND  THE  FOUR  DAYS  OF  THE  WEEK  ....  73 

CHAPTER  VII 

OBATALA 8l 

CHAPTER  VIII 

IFA  AND  THE  FOUR  WALLS  OF  THE  YORUBA  KINGDOM  . . 86 

CHAPTER  IX 

ESHU 94 

CHAPTER  X 

AGANJU,  YEMOJA,  THEIR  OFFSPRING,  AND  THE  OGBONI  OR 

council 97 

CHAPTER  XI 

OLOKUN  OLOSA  AND  FISHERMAN I06 

CHAPTER  XII 

OGUN,  OSHOWSI,  AND  THE  HUNTER Il6 

CHAPTER  XIII 

SEASONS 130 

CHAPTER  XIV 


OKE,  OJO,  AJESHALUGA,  AND  FARMING 


140 


CONTENTS 


xiii 

CHAPTER  XV 

PAGE 

ODUS  OF  IFA 147 

CHAPTER  XVI 

SHANGO— OYA — OBA— OSHUN 156 

CHAPTER  XVII 

LAND  LAWS 195 

CHAPTER  XVIII 


CONCLUSION 


209 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS 


FISHERMEN  AND  TRAP  AT  OLOKEMEJI 

LAGOS  TYPES  

THE  ALAKE  AND  SOME  OF  HIS  OFFICIALS 

THE  LATE  BALE  OF  IBADAN  AND  SOME  OF  HIS 

OFFICIALS 

STONES  SACRED  TO  OGUN  

GROVES  SACRED  TO  ORE,  WIFE  AND  CHILD  . 

IN  ore’s  wife’s  GROVE 

STONE  CHAIR  PRESENTED  TO  SIR  W.  MACGREGOR  BY 
THE  ONI  OF  IFE,  NOW  IN  THE  BRITISH  MUSEUM 
A CHAIR  MARKET  AT  BADAGRY,  S.  NIGERIA  . 

OPA  ORANYAN  AT  IFE  , 

TREE  PLANTED  OVER  GRAVE  WHICH  THUS  BECOMES 

SACRED  . 

MEMBERS  OF  A FUNERAL  SECRET  SOCIETY  IN 
LAGOS  CALLED  ADAMORISHA,  WEARING  DRESSES 
SIMILAR  TO  THE  EGUNGUN,  EGUN 

“PORO”  HOUSE 

AGBOLO’S  SONS.  GREAT  NATIVE  HUNTERS 

METEOROLOGICAL  CHART 

SACRED  CAVE  AT  ABEOKUTA  


MAP 

THE  COLONY  AND  PROTECTORATE  OF  SOUTHERN 
NIGERIA,  1910  


Frojitispiece 
To  face  page  1 o 

„ » 14 

. Page  19 
• „ 20 

„ 21 

To  face  page  23 

. . Page  24 

To  ) ace  page  28 

32 

» » 1 19 

. Page  1 31 
Tofacepa^e  164 

End  of  Vol. 


Nigerian  Studies 


ERRATA 

Page  Line 

19  2*,  after  “ Ogun  ” add  “3”  and,  footnote,  “ :i  About  the  same  distance  on 

brought  us  to  another  screen  of  palm  leaves.” 

34  12,  for  And  read  He. 

35  1 5*>  for  retained  read  regained. 

36  2,  for  grave  read  grove. 

43  16,  for  Egbas  read  Egba. 

56  9*,  for  Kakong  read  Kakongo. 

62  12,  for  Jayse  read  Jyase. 

85  2,  for  Yorubas  read  Yoruba. 

90  3*,  for].  T.  Palmer  read  I . T.  Palmer. 

97  2*,  footnote,  for  offices  read  officers, 

xoi  6,  7,  transpose  “ light”  to  read  after  “ Imole.” 

103  1*,  104,  14,  for  Orishaula  read  Orishanla. 

145  2>*,for  Shalua  read  Shaluga. 

190  17,  after  small  pox  insert  “2”  and  add  footnote,  “2  See  Addendum,, 

page  231.” 

200  12*,  for  that  read  than. 

203  8*,  after  Ajele  insert  “ 1 ” and  add  footnote,  “ 1 See  note,  page  204.” 

215  diagram,  last  line,  after  Storing  insert  Memory. 

216  9*,  for  and  read  but. 

228  3rd  col.,  1 3*,  for  Nervous  system  read  Memory. 

229  3rd  col.,  8,  transpose  entries  Akpena  and  Odofin. 

229  1st  col.,  for  The  Speaker  read  The  Chief  Justice;  for  The  Lord  Chief 
Justice  read  The  Speaker. 

* From  bottom. 


* 


* 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 

EXPLANATORY  CHAPTER 

In  trying  to  impart  one’s  ideas  on  a foreign  people 
to  one’s  readers,  a great  difficulty  arises,  i.e.  the 
fact  that  for  the  most  part  one’s  public  knows  little 
or  nothing  about  the  surroundings  of  the  natives 
about  whom  one  is  endeavouring  to  write.  Well, 
it  would  take  many  volumes  to  describe  fully  so 
interesting  a people  as  the  Yoruba,  even  if  one 
had  the  ability,  so  that  I must  leave  those  interested 
in  this  general  branch  of  knowledge  to  others  who 
have  written  on  the  country.  Then  I sometimes 
find  it  impossible  to  explain  many  foreign  words  that 
will  keep  suddenly  cropping  up,  so  that  my  collection 
of  apparent  facts  at  times  resembles  bits  of  a mosaic 
which  the  collector  has  to  leave  to  his  successor 
to  put  together.  I take  for  granted  that  these 
pieces  are  very  precious  to  those  who  are  ever 
on  the  look  out  for  something  new  that  may  throw 
light  on  the  many  problems  that  are  still  puzzling 
the  thinking  world,  I do  not  hesitate  therefore  to 
mention  them.  In  presenting  this  little  work,  then, 


B 


2 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


it  is  to  be  understood  that  I am  fully  conscious 
of  its  faults,  but  I am  fearful  often  to  correct  them 
lest  in  so  doing  I may  spoil  the  native  colouring 
and  inculcate  some  erroneous  idea  that  may  be 
really  foreign  to  the  people  whose  mental  outlook 
I am  trying  to  illustrate. 

A new  name  of  a personage  or  a deity  suddenly 
appears  on  the  scene,  and  I know  that  my  reader 
requires  a far  more  accurate  account  of  him  than 
I or  my  informant  can  give  him  ; well,  all  I can  say 
is  that  it  is  in  this  sudden  fashion  that  we  who 
try  to  gather  information  in  some  foreign  fields 
obtain  it. 

I know  that  this  jumpy  style,  which  one  of  my 
friends  describes  as  “writing  in  seven  league  boots,” 
is  very  irritating  to  the  earnest  student,  and,  I 
am  very  sorry  for  this  also,  and  I wish  to  assure 

my  reader  that  I have  tried  to  say  as  much  as 

possible  about  these  sudden  apparitions,  either  at 
the  time  of  their  coming  on  to  the  stage  or  in  notes 

which  refer  to  other  places  in  the  book  where  more 

is  said  about  them. 

All  my  information  is  drawn  from  native  sources 
on  the  spot,  the  arrangement  and  order  is  not 
mine.  The  order  is  taken  from  the  order  of  the 
Odus  (palm  nuts  used  in  divination  by  the  priests 
of  Ifa)1  as  given  to  me  by  the  babalawo  (priest)  Oli- 
yitan,  and  from  the  seasons. 

There  is  one  more  difficulty  that  I may  be  able 
to  clear  away.  In  At  the  Back  of  the  Black  Man  s 

1 Ifa  is  the  name  of  the  Yoruba  oracular  deity. 


EXPLANATORY  CHAPTER 


3 


Mind  the  formula  given  is  4+4 x 6+4  or  32  parts 
in  all,  that  is  forming  one  whole.  Now  among  the 
Yoruba  the  formula  is  4 + 2x6  or  16  parts.  This 
is  the  pith  of  the  work.  Thus  I commence  the 
book  by  giving  my  reader  a very  short  account 
of  the  history  of  the  Yoruba  as  we  know  it  as 
well  as  from  a native  point  of  view.  I then  take  a 
legend  of  creation  given  to  me  by  an  old  priestess 
called  Oja  through  the  mouth  of  a man  called 
Togun.  This  takes  me  to  a short  account  of  the 
sacred  stones  at  Ife  the  religious  capital  and  cradle 
of  the  Yoruba  people.  As  these  stones  are  said 
to  be  men  and  women  who  on  their  death  have 
turned  to  stone,  I then  say  a few  words  about  death 
and  burial  customs  from  which  I find  I cannot 
dissociate  some  secret  societies.  A consideration  of 
these  subjects  points  to  the  fact  that  the  Yoruba 
have  beatified  their  ancestors.  This  being  a natural 
and  so  a general  practice,  there  are  in  consequence 
thousands  of  such  Orishas  or  deified  spirits,  all  of 
which  must  be  most  interesting  studies  of  family 
history.  But  a great  philosopher  called  Ifa  (who 
is  mentioned  in  the  story  of  creation  as  one  of  the 
four  great  deities)  is  said  to  have  chosen  16  persons 
out  of  these  different  classes  of  people  and  formed 
them  into  a kind  of  council.  These  16  had  their 
16  family  Orishas  1 and  thus  we  get  at  the  number 
32  and  the  formula  of  the  Bavili  and  the  Bini  as 
shown  in  At  the  Back  of  the  Black  Mans  Mind. 
Crawley,  in  The  Idea  of  the  Soul,  writes  “ Frazer 
1 See  note  1,  page  12. 


B 2 


4 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


gives  the  following  description  based  on  Maspero 
and  Wiedermann.”  Every  man  (Egyptian)  has  a 
soul,  ka,  which  is  his  exact  counterpart  or  double 
with  the  same  features,  the  same  gait,  and  even 
the  same  dress,  as  the  man  himself.  Many  of  the 
monuments  dating  from  the  eighteenth  century 
onwards,  represent  various  kings  appearing  before 
divinities,  while  behind  the  king  stands  his  soul 
or  double  as  a little  man  with  the  king’s  features. 
In  modern  Egypt  every  child  born  has  a djinnee 
companion  born  with  it.  It  is  an  angel,  but  often 
hurts  its  protege.  It  is  an  exact  counterpart  of 
the  person  himself,  except  that  for  male  it  is  female 
and  for  female  male.  Something  like  this  exists 
in  the  naming  of  the  child’s  Orisha  among  the 
Yoruba  and  will  be  found  in  the  chapter  on 
marriage. 

To  continue,  I give  my  reader  what  information 
I am  able  about  these  chosen  Orisha  and  find  that 
they  are  connected  with  certain  occupations,  i.e. 
those  of  fishing,  hunting,  marriage,  planting,  market- 
ing, and  construction.  I find  that  the  native  form 
of  Government  official  for  Orisha  coincides  with 
the  heavenly  one  and  I give  the  lists  of  Officials 
and  Orishas.  Further,  the  meaning  of  the  Odus 
in  the  order  given  are  connected  with  the  Categories 
of  thought,  which  I have  shown  exist  at  the  back 
of  the  black  man’s  mind  in  the  Congo  and  in  Benin, 
i.e.  those  of  water,  earth,  fire,  germination  or 
conception,  reproduction  or  pregnancy,  death  and 
life. 


EXPLANATORY  CHAPTER 


5 


In  my  concluding  chapter  I suggest  that  the 
elements  of  native  religious  and  social  government 
are  to  be  found  in  the  black  man’s  nervous  system, 
which  in  my  opinion  responds  to  the  will  of  the 
Almighty  Architect  of  their  Universe. 


CHAPTER  I 


A FEW  NOTES  ON  THE  HISTORY  OF  YORUBALAND 

Introductory  Historical  Remarks 

From  Dalzel’s  History  of  Dahomey , 1793,  it  would 
seem  that  Yorubaland  about  the  year  1700  was  under 
one  King,  or  Alafin,  who  resided  at  Old  Oyo 1 or 
Katunga.  That  this  kingdom  when  united  was  a 
very  powerful  one  is  shown  from  the  fact  that  until 
the  year  1818  the  Dahomi  paid  tribute  to  the  Alafin 
of  Oyo. 

It  is  only  from  this  date  (1700),  when  the  decadence 
of  the  Yoruba  Kingdom  had  set  in,  that  the  native 
chroniclers  can  give  us  any  definite  knowledge  of  the 
Yoruba  history.  From  this  time  we  have  a list  of 
Alafins  given  to  us. 

1.  Ajagbo. 

2.  Abiodun. 

3.  Arogangan  ; during  whose  reign  his 
nephew  Afonja  raised  an  insurrection  and  so 
hurried  on  the  downfall  of  the  Kingdom. 

4.  Adebo. 

5.  Maku. 


1 Pronounced  Awyaw. 


CH.  I 


THE  HISTORY  OF  YORUBALAND 


7 


6.  An  Interregnum  during  which  the  Oba- 
shorun  or  Prime  Minister  of  the  Alafin  seems 
to  have  kept  the  State  from  actual  ruin. 

7.  Majotu. 

8.  Amodo,  about  1825. 

About  1830  Lander  visited  Old  Oyo,  but  between 
1833  and  1835  the  Mohammedans  captured  and 
destroyed  the  old  town,  and  the  Yoruba  were  obliged 
to  found  a new  capital  where  Oyo  now  stands. 

It  was  about  this  time  also  that  the  Egba  declared 
their  independence.  They  were  finally  driven  out  of 
the  country  that  they,  as  a section  of  the  Yoruba 
people,  occupied,  and  in  1838  they  founded  their 
present  capital,  Abeokuta. 

A chief  called  Lishabi  is  said  to  have  led  them  to 
Abeokuta,  and  to  show  how  near  to  the  mythological 
period  of  their  history  we  even  now  are  I am  able  to  give 
you  the  story  of  how  Lishabi  when  defeated  by  the 
Dahomi  descended  into  the  earth. 

How  Lishabi  descended  into  the  Earth 

Lishabi  was  a great  warrior  who  lived  at  Ikija, 
Abeokuta.  One  day  when  there  was  a great  battle 
between  the  Egba  and  Dahomi,  and  the  Egba 
were  put  to  flight  and  many  killed,  Lishabi  was  so 
ashamed  that  he  would  not  return  to  Abeokuta,  and  so 
pointing  his  sword  to  the  earth  asked  her  to  open. 
She  opened  and  he  went  headlong  into  her  depths. 
His  sword  is  there  to  this  day  marking  the  place  where 
he  thrust  it  into  the  earth.  His  brass  chain  is  also 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


there  ; and  if  anyone  begins  to  draw  the  chain  out  he 
can  pull  about  40  feet  of  it  out  of  the  ground,  but  then 
Lishabi  pulls  it  back  again.  Many  people  have  seen 
pigeons  fly  out  of  the  place,  they  feed  here  and  there, 
and  then  go  back,  so  they  know  Lishabi  has  his  house 
there.  One  man  tried  to  make  a farm  there  and 
started  felling  the  bush,  but  he  died,  so  now  no  one 
dares  to  farm  in  this  place.  And  the  people  of  Ikija 
go  there  yearly  to  worship  him.  They  offer  rams, 
goats,  fowls,  and  yams  to  him. 

By  the  year  1840  the  seeds  of  dissension  sown  by 
Afonja  had  spread  so  rapidly  that  we  find  the  proud 
Kingdom  of  the  Yoruba  people  split  up  into  a number 
of  so-called  independent  states. 

Illorin  had  been  lost  to  the  Alafin,  and  is  now 
inhabited  by  a mixture  of  Hausa,  Fulah,  and 
Yoruba. 

Ibadan,  a semi-independent  state,  still  recognises 
the  Alafin  and  pays  tribute  yearly, 

The  Egba,  a fine  race  of  agriculturists,  declare 
that  they  are  quite  independent,  as  also  do  the 
Ijebu,  Ilesha,  Ife,  and  Iketu  (now  in  French  territory). 

From  1840  to  1886,  when  the  British  Government 
intervened  as  peace-maker,  wars  between  these  parts 
of  the  Yoruba  people  were  constant.  From  that 
date  until  1892  the  peace-maker  has  had  to  punish 
the  Ijebu  and  Egba  for  closing  their  trade  roads. 

In  August  1861  Docemo  ceded  Lagos  to  the 
British.  In  1863  Kosoko  ceded  Palma  and  Lekki, 
much  to  the  disgust  of  the  chief  of  Epe,  who  refused 


r 


THE  HISTORY  OF  YORUBALAND 


9 


to  cede  his  rights  and  was  punished  for  it.  And  in  the 
same  year  the  chiefs  of  Badagry  ceded  their  territory 
to  the  British. 

Lagos  became  a great  slaving  port  about  the  year 
1815  when  the  King  of  Benin  and  a few  other  chiefs 
refused  to  allow  slaves  to  be  exported  from  their 
territories.  The  original  inhabitants  of  Lagos  were  a 
mixture  of  Bini  and  Yoruba  people.  When  it  became 
a port  of  export  for  slaves,  such  slaves  as  became 
residents  as  labourers  and  servants  of  the  slave  dealers 
and  merchants  added  their  quota  to  the  population  ; 
and  when  after  1861  it  became  a British  colony  many 
freed  slaves  from  Sierra  Leone  and  other  parts,  more 
especially  Brazil,  made  their  homes  there. 

The  Colony  of  Lagos  in  1863  rejoiced  in  a separate 
Government,  but  in  1866  with  the  other  West  Coast 
Settlements  it  was  attached  to  Sierra  Leone. 

In  1874,  after  the  Ashanti  war,  Lagos  became  part 
of  the  New  Gold  Coast  Colony  and  in  1886  it  became 
a distant  Crown  Colony,  since  when  its  progress 
has  been  phenomenal. 

The  formation  of  the  Niger  and  adjacent  territories 
into  a Royal  Charter  Co.  with  Mr.  (now  Sir)  G.  Goldie 
as  Deputy  Governor,  following  the  declaration  of  a 
Protectorate  of  the  Niger  Territories  by  the  British 
Government  in  June  1885,  is  so  well  known  a fact 
that  the  mere  mention  of  the  event  is  sufficient. 

And  I need  only  jog  my  reader’s  memory  to  call  to 
his  mind  a knowledge  of  the  time  when  that  part  of 
the  West  Coast  which  finally  became  S.  Nigeria  was 
more  or  less  governed  by  Consuls  resident  in  the 


owe 


io  NIGERIAN  STUDIES  chap. 

Island  of  Fernando  Po,  called  by  Burton  the  Foreign 
Office  Grave. 

The  time  came  when  the  Foreign  Office  having 
worked  up  the  “ Raw  Material  ” the  finer  processes  of 
the  Colonial  Office  were  applied. 

In  1889  I was  present  at  a meeting  in  Calabar 
when  the  Special  Commissioner  Major  (now  Sir) 
Claude  MacDonald  interviewed  the  Chiefs,  and  on  the 
1 st  August  1891  the  Oil  Rivers  commenced  a new 
era  under  the  title  of  the  Oil  Rivers  Protectorate. 

The  Oil  Rivers  Protectorare  became  what  is  now 
known  as  Old  Southern  Nigeria  while  the  rest  of  the 
Niger  Protectorate  became  Northern  Nigeria. 

In  1906  Southern  Nigeria  and  the  Colony  of  Lagos 
and  Protectorate  were  amalgamated,  and  the  Colony  of 
Lagos  and  Protectorate  became  the  Western  Province 
of  what  is  to-day  known  as  the  Colony  and  Protecto- 
rate of  Southern  Nigeria. 

The  following  notes  refer  chiefly  to  this  Western 
Province,  known  generally  as  Yorubaland. 

The  Origin  of  the  Seven  Yoruba  States 

In  “At  the  Back  of  the  Black  Man’s  Mind”  I 
pointed  out  that  the  Congo  was  composed  of  a central 
Kingdom  surrounded  by  other  six  states,  also  that 
each  of  these  states  was  divided  into  seven  provinces, 
six  surrounding  a seventh  where  the  Fumu  or  Chief 
of  the  sub- Kingdom  resided. 

F.S.,  in  the  Nigerian  Chronicle , in  a paper  entitled 
“ A Chapter  in  the  History  of  the  Yoruba  Country,” 
writes  : — “ Yoruba  is  one  of  the  seven  countries  or 


Lagos  Type.  Lagos  Type. 


i THE  HISTORY  OF  YORUBALAND  n 

states  which  the  Hausa  people  term  Bansa  Bokoi 
(the  vulgar  seven)  in  contradistinction  to  Hausa  Bokoi 
(the  Hausa  seven);  the  latter  term  is  applied  to  the 
original  Hausa  states  and  the  former  to  seven 
countries  or  states  originating  from  the  same  races  as 
the  Hausa  people,  but  which  do  not  form  part  of  the 
Hausa  nation.” 

He  goes  on  to  say,  “ There  can  be  little  doubt  that 
the  Yoruba  people  are  at  least  intimately  connected 
with  the  Orientals.  Their  customs  bear  a remarkable 
resemblance  to  those  of  the  races  of  Asia.  Their 
vocabulary  teems  with  words  derived  from  some 
of  the  Semitic  languages  ; and  there  are  many 
natives  of  Yorubaland  to  be  found  having  features 
very  much  like  those  of  Syrians  or  Arabians.” 

Most  natives  I have  talked  to  on  this  subject  are 
conscious  of  this  origin  from  a superior  race,  and  the 
marked  superiority  of  the  Yoruba  people  to  their 
neighbours  certainly  points  to  something  of  the 
sort. 

But  many  also  are  only  too  anxious  to  ignore  the  fact 
that  the  country  was  peopled  by  pagan  Africans  and 
that  they  are  consequently  in  reality  a mixed  race 
among  whom  paganism  persists. 

Now  these  dear  old  pagans  are  said  to  have  given 
the  name  of  their  Creator  Odudua  to  the  leader  of 
the  Bornu  immigrants  whose  real  name  has  been 
forgotten,  and  there  is  a legend  that  a Hausa 
Mussulman  came  to  Ife,  the  religious  capital  of 
Yorubaland,  and  told  them  to  “ worship  Allah.”  “ He 
created  the  mountains,  He  created  the  lowlands,  He 


12 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


created  everything,  He  created  us.”  But  in  a critcism 
by  the  editor  of  the  Nigerian  Chronicle  the  coming  of 
the  Mussulman  must  be  placed  at  a much  earlier  date 
than  that  given  by  F.S.,  i.e.  many  years  after  the 
eleventh  or  twelfth  century  of  the  Christian  Era. 

It  is  possible,  however,  that  Mussulman  influence,  at 
whatever  date  it  first  made  its  appearance,  may  have 
been  the  cause  of  the  reorganisation  of  the  religion  of 
the  pagan  Yoruba.  It  was  perhaps  the  means  of 
putting  Jakuta  or  Shango,  the  thunder  and  lightning 
God,  in  his  place  and  the  substituting  of  Olorun,  the 
owner  of  heaven,  for  that  great  Orisha.1 

To  this  time,  then,  the  Yoruba  pagan  may  owe, 
not  the  origin  of  his  Orishas,  but  the  order  in  which 
the  greater  ones  have  been  handed  down  to  the 
present  generation. 

Mr.  George,  in  Historical  Notes  on  the  Yoruba 
Country , gives  us  another  variant  of  the  historical 
traditions  of  the  Yoruba.  Mr.  George  says : — 
“ There  are  many  traditions  about  the  Yoruba 
Kingdom.  We  quote  one  which  says  that  the  Yoruba 
Kingdom  was  peopled  by  six  brothers  ; that  at  the 
departure  of  their  father  to  his  home  in  the  north, 
they  left  their  mother,  whose  name  was  Omonide,  and 
travelled  downward.  These  formed  six  distinct 

kingdoms  and  are  known  to  this  day  by  the  respective 
regal  titles  : Alake,  Alaketu,  Onisabe  of  Sabe,  Onila 
of  Ila,  Oni  Bini  or  Ibini  or  Benin,  and  Oloyo  of  Oyo. 
Some  time  after  they  migrated  downwards,  their 
mother  hearing  that  they  were  settled  decided  to  visit 
1 Orisha  = deified  departed  one. 


I 


THE  HISTORY  OF  YORUBALAND 


*3 


them.  On  leaving  home,  she  took  with  her  the  piece 
of  cloth,  the  band  or  Oja,  with  which  she  had  secured 
them  on  her  back  when  they  were  young,  and  the 
small  pot,  or  Oru,  in  which  she  had  prepared  their 
infant  drink.  She  thought  that  perhaps,  as  they  had 
become  Kings,  they  might  ungratefully  despise  her, 
and  she  was  ready  to  curse  all  and  any  of  them 
that  might  do  so.  Accordingly,  she  went  first  to 
Alaketu  1 the  eldest.  She  was  received  with  all  the 
honours  of  her  position.  She  was  pleased  at  this 
reception,  and  after  remaining  some  time  she  went  to 
visit  the  Alake,  where  she  was  similarly  treated.  She 
spent  some  time  here  purposing  to  visit  her  other 
children.  Ultimately  she  fell  ill  and  died. 

“It  is  said  that  she,  being  pleased  with  her  recep- 
tion by  the  Alaketu,  gave  him  on  her  departure  the 
band  or  Oja  with  which  she  had  secured  her  children 
. . . . She  told  him  that  the  cloth  was  an  important 
charm  which  possessed  the  power  of  good  and  ill ; that 
good  or  evil  will  follow  anyone  according  to  his  wish 
or  utterance  while  he  holds  or  puts  on  this  cloth.  It 
is  said  that  one  of  the  Kings  of  Ketu,  who  never 
would  go  out  on  any  public  occasion  without  having 
on  this  cloth,  was  once  upbraided  by  his  Chiefs  for  it, 
and  was  threatened  to  be  driven  away  from  the 
throne. 

“ An  altercation  ensued,  during  which  he  made 
certain  imprecations  which  are  said  to  be  operating 
upon  the  country  and  people  to  this  time.  That  since 

1 Most  of  the  Ketu  country  is  now  French  and  so  separated  from  the 
old  Yoruba  Kingdom. 


i4  NIGERIAN  STUDIES  chap. 

he  was  disgraced  for  having  on  an  old  cloth,  made 
brown  by  the  dust  of  age,  their  country  will  ever  be 
red  and  dust  covered,  and  their  garment  be  it  ever  so 
clean  will  appear  and  remain  dirty.” 

“ During  Omonide’s  stay  with  the  Alake  of 
Abeokuta  she  gave  him  the  small  earthen  pot  or 
Oru  in  which  she  had  always  boiled  infant  drink 
for  her  children.  She  told  him  that  that  pot  was 
a charm  which  had  the  power  to  establish  himself 
and  his  brothers  in  their  cities  ; that  it  was  to  be 
kept  in  memory  of  her,  that  she  would  often  visit  them 
and  that  the  pot  should  not  be  removed  from  the 
watch-care  of  the  Alake  by  any  of  his  brothers. 
The  Oru,  a small  earthen  pot,  is  spoken  of  as  being 
now  in  the  care  of  the  Alake  and  in  the  Egbas’ 
former  town,  which  is  about  twenty-five  miles  from 
Abeokuta.  There  it  is  adorned  and  venerated  in 
respect  of  their  dead  mother  up  to  the  present. 
Kings  of  the  Interior  seek  and  invoke  the  aid 
of  their  dead  mother  Omonide  or  Iyamode  before 
coronation. 

“At  the  departure  of  the  father,  he  gave  to  his 
youngest  son  Oloyo  a small  Ado  or  gourd  receptacle 
into  which  he  had  put  some  ingredients  together 
with  common  sand,  as  it  might  be  of  service  to  him 
and  his  brothers  in  their  travels.  It  was  of  great  use 
to  them,  for,  when  they  travelled  southwards,  they 
met  a large  river  which  they  determined  to  cross. 
They  got  into  a canoe  and  pulled  off ; for  a whole 
day  no  land  was  visible.  The  next  day  Oloyo 
remembered  the  gift  of  their  father  ; he  opened  the 


The  Alake  and  some  of  his  Officials. 


The  late  Bale  of  Ibadan  and  some  of  his  Officials. 

[Face  p.  14. 


i THE  HISTORY  OF  YORUBALAND  15 

small  Ado  and  poured  some  of  its  contents  into  the 
river.  Immediately  dry  land  was  visible.  Hence 
he  is  said  to  be  the  ‘ land  owner  ' ...  . The  Yoruba 
Kingdom  was  once  a great  Power  in  West  Africa. 
It  had  Dahomey,  Hausa,  Tapa,  and  many  other 
important  tribes  and  countries  under  its  control. 

“ It  lost  its  power  through  internecine  wars,  which, 
together  with  foreign  invasions,  brought  about  an 
entire  disruption  of  the  Yoruba  Kingdom.  The 
remains  formed  themselves  into  small  towns,  their 
once  tributary  towns,  and  these  countries  of  course 
became  independent. 

“ In  these  small  towns  the  remnant  of  the  Yoruba 
nation  remained  in  peace  for  about  two  hundred  and 
fifty  years.  After  this  another  war  broke  out,  which 
we  are  told  began  at  Apomu,  a market  in  the  Ijebu 
Country.  In  this  war  the  whole  Yorubaland  was  laid 
waste,  and  from  this  the  exportation  of  slaves  from  the 
Yoruba  Countries  commenced.” 

Mr.  George  describes  how  a General  called  Maye, 
the  Balogun  (or  war  chief)  of  Ife,  with  his  Captains, 
Abe  and  Laboside,  overran  the  whole  of  the  Yoruba 
Country.  He  appears  to  have  become  a great  slave 
raider. 

At  his  death  the  whole  nation  was  again  scattered. 

He  continues  : “ These  wars  which  have  laid  our 
country  waste  one  hundred  years  ago,  still  continue 
from  that  time  to  this  ” (somewhere  in  the  nineties 
of  the  last  century).  “ The  whole  country  has  not 
had  ten  years’  rest.  The  Ijaiye  War  of  i860  which 
extended  to  Iperu,  Makun  and  Ikorodu  and  the 


i6 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CH.  I 


Eketiparapo  and  the  Ibadan-Ilorin  war  are  the 
offspring  of  this  Opomu  War.  We  are  inclined  to 
believe  that  the  different  tribes  themselves  cannot 
yet  settle  these  differences,  seeing  that  each  tribe 1 
has  a hand  in  the  causes  which  led  to  them.” 

Anyone  wishing  to  know  how  this  peace  was 
accomplished  by  the  British  should  read  “ Papers 
relative  to  the  Reduction  of  Lagos,”  1852,  and 
“ Correspondence  respecting  the  War  between  native 
tribes  in  the  Interior,”  1887 — two  very  interesting 
papers  presented  to  both  Houses  of  Parliament  by 
command  of  Her  late  Majesty. 

1 This  is  interesting  as  at  the  present  day  many  half-educated  natives 
are  apt  to  put  down  the  ruin  of  their  country  to  its  occupation  by 
British  Government. 


CHAPTER  II 

CREATION  AND  THE  SACRED  STONES  AT  IFE 

Creation 

There  are  many  stories  of  creation  among  the 
Yoruba,  but  the  story  which  I have  chosen  to  open 
this  study  on  the  Genesis  of  the  Yoruba  is  remark- 
able, I think,  owing  to  the  statement  of  Oja  that 
the  three  parts  representing  God  in  Creation  turned 
to  stone  when  once  they  had  set  Creation  going, 
leaving  the  carrying  on  of  the  work,  it  would  appear, 
to  sixteen  great  Orisha.  Togun  (see  below)  does  not 
mention  the  word  Olorun,  the  word  now  used  to 
represent  God,  who  is  also  known  as  Eleda  the 
Creator,  Elemi  (the  owner  of  breath).  I think  we 
shall  learn  as  we  proceed  that  he,  as  the  owner  of 
heaven,  is  a development  of  Jakuta,  the  father 
thunder  god. 

It  was  in  the  village  of  I lobe  in  the  Egbado 
district,  S.  Nigeria,  that  the  following  account  of  the 
Creation  was  given  to  me  by  an  old  lady  called 
Oja  who,  the  Bale  or  Chief  told  me,  knew  all 
about  it.  She  was  a Priestess,  and  spoke  to  me 
through  a relation  of  hers  called  Togun,  who  was  also 


c 


1 8 NIGERIAN  STUDIES  chap. 

connected  with  the  Priesthood.  Deputy  Ranger 
Edwards  acted  as  interpreter.  Togun  said,  “ In 
the  beginning  two  people  made  the  world,  one 
Yemuhu  and  the  man.”  “What  man?”  I asked. 

“ Orishala,  the  husband  of  Yemuhu,  who  is  also 
called  Obaba  Arugbo.  When  Yemuhu  and  Orishala 
came  to  the  world  they  were  afraid,  and  they  were 
accompanied  by  Ajajuno,  a person  who  was  not 
made  by  anyone,  and  who  acted  as  a messenger 
and  war  chief.  She  was  a woman  whose  business 
it  was  to  fight  the  world. 

“ When  Yemuhu  and  Orishala  had  finished  their 
work  of  Creation,  and  their  visit  to  the  world,  they 
turned  to  stone — and  when  Orishala  was  about  to 
turn  to  stone  Yemuhu  said  she  would  also  turn  to 
stone  again.  But  before  they  turned  to  stone 

Orishala  had  a ram  tied  to  his  waist  by  a rope,  and 
Yemuhu  had  a gourd  or  calabash  containing  the 
sixteen  snails,1  and  when  she  turned  to  stone  these 
sixteen  snails  became  the  head  of  Eleda  ” (as  we 
have  noticed  one  of  the  names  by  which  Olorun  is 
said  to  be  known). 

“ And  what  became  of  the  ram  ? ” 

“I  do  not  know.” 

“ When  Eleda  arose  he  noticed  that  I fa  had  no  head. 

“One  day  Eleda  fighting  with  Ifa  knocked  him 
down,  and  his  head  came  out,  then  his  chest  came 
out,  then  his  nose,  then  his  mouth  and  eyes. 
Orishala  did  this.” 

1 These  16  snails  are  symbols  of  Odudua,  another  name  evidently  for 
Yemuhu. 


ii  CREATION  AND  SACRED  STONES  AT  IFE  19 

Here  Togun  paused,  and  the  woman  Oja  gave 
him  a small  tin  of  palm  oil.  With  this  Togun 
oiled  his  tongue  and  then  proceeded.  “ These  stones 
are  to  be  seen  at  Ife  up  to  the  present.” 


The  Grove  Sacred  to  Ore 


On  one  of  my  tours  through  Yorubaland  I went 
to  Ife  and  stayed  a day  there  (I  should  like  to 
have  stayed  a year)  and  managed  to  hear  a good 
deal  of  the  departed  changing  into  stones. 

The  Oni 1 of  Ife  was  kind  enough  to  send  his 
clerk  with  me  to  show  me  over  the  “Grove 
Sacred  to  an  old  Oni  of  Ife  called  Ore.”  2 


They  say  that  to  avoid  a war  this  old  Oni,  his 
wife  and  son,  retired  to  this  grove  and  died,  and 
were  turned  to  stone.  This  grove  is  situated  on 
the  road  about  ten  minutes  outside  the  Eastern 
Gate  of  the  city  of  Ife.  Leaving  the  road  and 
turning  to  the  right  we  marched  about  1 1 1 feet 
down  a lane  when  we  passed  through  a 
screen  of  palm  leaves  hanging  from  two 
Perigun  trees.  About  ninety  feet  from 
this  entrance  on  the  left  of  the  pathway 
we  reached  three  stones,  which  they 
called  Ogun ; thirteen  feet  from  here 
we  passed  through  a kind  of  gateway  which  led  us 


Stones  sacred 
to  Ogun. 


1 Oni  is  the  title  of  a chief  who  is  much  in  the  same  position  as  the 
Archbishop  of  Canterbury  is  in  England.  It  is  also  the  name  given  to 
the  firstborn. 

2 Ore  means  “Spirit  of  the  departed.”  Not  only  did  Orishala  and 
Odudua  turn  to  stone,  but,  as  we  shall  learn,  Ifa  also. 


C 2 


20 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


ii  CREATION  AND  SACRED  STONES  AT  IFE  21 


into  a small  square  with  two  other  gateways  leading 
out  of  it,  one  to  the  East,  and  one  to  the  South. 

We  first  passed  through  the  eastern  gate  and 
there  under  a small  shed  in  the  centre  of  the  grove 
we  saw  the  stone  figure  of  Ore.  He  was  only  two 
feet  eight  inches  in  height,  but  three  feet  round  the 
waist,  so  I came  to  the 
conclusion  that  this 
hero  shrunk  some- 
what in  height  in  the 
process  of  turning  to 
stone.  Near  to  him 
were  two  kola  boxes 
or  dishes  in  stone  each 
one  foot  long  and  six 
inches  wide.  A stone 
which  looked  very 
much  like  a grave- 
stone was  standing  to 
the  south-east  of  the 
image.  They  said  it 
had  grown  out  of  the 
ground.  The  width 
of  this  grove  was 
about  seventeen  feet,  and  the  length  thirty-two 
feet. 

We  went  back  to  the  porch  and  now  passed 
through  the  entrance  to  the  south  which  led  us  down 
a passage  fifteen  feet  in  length,  and  then  we  entered 
the  enclosure,  oval  in  shape  and  about  sixty  feet  long, 
which  was  sacred  to  the  wife  of  Ore, 


22 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


About  thirty-one  feet  from  the  entrance  was  a 
small  circular  shed  under  which  the  figure  of  Ore’s 
wife  stood.  It  measured  three  feet  in  height  and  two 
feet  round  the  waist.  Sixteen  feet  from  this  shed  was 
a collection  of  interesting  stones.  Two  were  flat  (one 
of  which  was  broken)  and  measured  four  feet  six  inches 
by  one  foot  and,  three  feet  three  inches  by  one  foot 
respectively,  and,  rising  from  a mound  of  stones,  a 
carved  stone  representing  an  elephant’s  tusk  two  feet 
six  inches  in  height  stood  erect. 

Passing  out  of  this  grove  by  a lane  forty-three  feet 
long  we  came  to  a clearing  measuring  twenty-three 
by  twenty-eight  feet  near  the  side  of  which  was  a 
hut  with  mud  walls,  where,  they  said,  the  worshippers 
who  had  sacrificed  to  Ore  came  to  cook  and  eat 
the  flesh  of  the  animals  sacrificed.  The  clerk  told  me 
that  this  hut  once  contained  a slab  of  rock  upon  which 
a crocodile  was  carved.  We  had  a good  look  for  it, 
but  it  was  not  there. 

Other  Sacred  Stones  at  Ife 

Morimi  and  Alashe,  mother  and  son,  having  also 
turned  to  stones,  are  now  worshipped  as  Orishas  at 
Ife. 

The  Oni  of  Ife  said  that  Alashe  (the  law- 
giver) was  Jesus,1  the  father  of  all  white  men,  and  he 
was  not  sure  but  he  thought  that  he  also  was 
descended  from  him. 

Alashe,  he  said,  was  the  only  child  of  Morimi  who 


1 Did  the  Oni  mean  Moses  ? 


Stone  chair  presented  to  Sir  W.  Macgregor  by  the 
Oni  of  Iff,,  now  in  the  British  Museum. 


A Chair  Market  at  Badagry,  S.  Nigeria. 


[Face  i>.  23. 


ii  CREATION  AND  SACRED  STONES  AT  IFE  23 

was  worshipped  for  having  sacrificed  her  son  to  save 
the  city  from  destruction.  He  pointed  out  the  house 
she  used  to  live  in,  which  is  quite  near  to  his  palace. 

I also  saw  the  house  Alashe  is  said  to  have 
inhabited  ; it  is  situated  down  the  hill  to  the  east  of 
the  palace.  In  front  of  the  house  two  poles  had 
been  placed  in  the  ground  and  a sheet  of  white  cloth 
was  hanging  from  a string  tied  from  pole  to  pole. 
Seven  trees  formed  a kind  of  arbour  in  which  were 
one  or  two  sacred  stones.  Women  dressed  in  white 
were  kneeling  here  and  there  as  if  in  prayer.  Alashe’s 
festival  was  then  being  held. 

The  story  goes  that  when  war  was  being  waged 
against  Ife,  God  threatened  to  destroy  the  city  unless 
a woman  with  only  one  child,  and  that  a male,  was 
willing  to  sacrifice  it.  Now  Morimi,  who  had  only 
one  child,  Alashe,  was  a rich  woman  and  did  not 
wish  to  lose  her  wealth  so  she  agreed  to  sacrifice  her 
son. 

When  Alashe  was  about  to  be  killed  he  and  all 
his  property  were  turned  into  stone.  A chair  or 
stool  now  in  the  British  Museum  was  the  property 
of  Alashe.  He  had  sent  all  his  property  to  the  palace 
of  the  Oni  for  safety  while  the  war  was  on.  The  Oni  said 
that  when  Captain  Bower  was  pacifying  the  country  he 
took  the  stool  from  Ife  and  gave  it  to  Sir  W.  Macgregor, 
and  he  added,  “when  I went  down  to  Lagos  Sir  William 
offered  to  give  me  the  stool  back  but  I refused  to 
take  it.  I have  another  one  left.” 

Quite  close  to  the  palace  there  are  two  large  out- 
crops of  quartz  evidently  similar  to  that  from  which 


24 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


these  stools  and  other  stone  images  were  made,  so  we 
may  conclude  that  they  were  made  on  the  spot.  But 
by  whom  ? I am  inclined  to  think  that  they  must 
have  been  made  by  some  black  mason,  possibly  one  of 
those  natives  sent  to  the  King  of  Portugal  in  the 
fifteenth  century  and  educated  by  the  Portuguese, 
He  may  have  returned  as  a lay  brother  or  even 

as  a priest  and 
found  his  way 
to  I f e.  He 
then  possibly 
introduced  a 
form  of  Chris- 
tianity and  built 
two  Churches, 
one  dedicated 
to  J esus  and 
one  to  the 
Virgin  Mary. 
The  stools  were 
perhaps  part  of 
the  furniture  of 
these  Churches. 

But  in  Ife  all  sorts  of  people  and  things  are  turned 
to  stone  ; the  Oni  has  the  figure  in  stone  of  a man 
caught  in  the  act  of  having  connection  with  his  sister. 

Just  outside  the  town  is  the  “stick”  of  Oranyan,1  a 

1 Togun  called  the  stone  pillars,  still  to  be  seen  in  Ife,  Orunmila,  but 
the  present  Oni  of  Ife  on  my  visit  there  called  the  pillar  still  standing 
Opa  Oranyan,  the  stick  or  pole  of  Oranyan.  Captain  Elgee  in  his 
paper  to  the  African  Society  translated  the  words  as  the  walking  stick  of 
God, 


ii  CREATION  AND  SACRED  STONES  AT  IFE  25 

rounded  pillar  eleven  feet  in  height  and  three  feet  six 
inches  in  girth,  with  the  remains  of  a second  in  two 
pieces  by  its  side,  also  what  may  be  the  remains  of  a 
third.  I asked  the  Oni  if  there  had  not  been  three 
pillars  at  one  time  and  he  gave  me  to  understand  that 
there  had  been,  but  that  during  the  wars  his  enemies 
had  taken  one. 

About  a foot  from  the  top  of  this  pillar  the  present 
Alafin  of  Oyo  on  his  visit  to  Ife  had  tied  a piece  of 
white  cloth  as  a kind  of  act  of  submission,  thereby 
putting  on  one  side  his  religion  as  a Mohammedan. 
Near  the  centre  of  the  pillar  a horn  and  an  axe  are 
carved.  Above  these  figures  forty-five  copper  headed 
nails  in  three  rows  had  been  driven  into  the  stone,  on  one 
side  of  it  ten,  and  on  the  other  eight,  while  below 
twenty  of  these  curious  nails  still  remain.  I measured 
this  stone  with  a tape  and  made  it  eleven  feet  in  height. 
Captain  Elgee  makes  it  twelve,  so  that  I can  only  con- 
clude that  we  measured  different  sides  of  it. 

I asked  the  Oni  where  the  three  sacred  trees  were,1 
but  he  hesitated  to  tell  me.  Then  I told  him  about 
the  three  pillars  of  mud  called  Eshu  and  the  three 
sacred  trees  at  Iaiu.  “ Ah  ! ” he  said,  “ they  got  their 
religion  from  here.” 

Later  on,  while  wandering  about  the  town,  I 
happened  to  descend  from  the  plateau  on  which  the  Oni 
has  his  palace  and  march  in  an  easterly  direction. 
My  attention  was  drawn  to  a woman  who  was  standing 
before  what  seemed  a heap  of  stones  praying.  As 
soon  as  she  had  gone  I went  into  this  grove  and 
1 See  Page  195  At  the  Back  of  the  Black  Man's  Mind , 


26 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


found  two  mounds  of  stones  with  the  stumps  of  old 
trees  in  the  centre  and  the  remains  of  another  heap  of 
stones.  This  then  was  the  place  where  the  three 
Oyisa  trees  had  once  existed. 

Opa  Oranyan,1  the  stick  or  pole  of  Oranyan,  is  what 
the  one  standing  pillar  is  called,  and  upon  making 
enquiries  I learnt  that  Opa  is  sometimes  used  as  a 
slang  word  for  penis.  It  is  possible  then  that  here  in 
Ife,  the  cradle  of  the  religion  of  the  Yoruba  people,  as 
in  Iaiu,  the  three  pillars  represented  the  three  procrea- 
tive persons,  Father,  Mother,  Son,  while  the  three 
trees  (Oyisa)  2 figured  the  same  three  persons  in  their 
God. 

Not  far  from  the  grove  where  I saw  the  woman 
addressing  the  three  mounds  of  stone,  and  on  the 
opposite  side  of  the  road,  is  an  altar  composed  of  stones 
sacred  to  the  moon,  called  Oshupa  Igio.  Upon  a large 
block  of  granite  surrounded  by  some  smaller  blocks 
of  the  same  substance  are  two  slabs  of  granite  on  which 
rest  two  smaller  stones  about  the  size  of  one’s  fist.  It 
is  said  that  when  the  Babalawo  rub  the  slabs  with 
them  they  shine  with  a light  like  that  of  the  moon. 
Amongst  the  stones  alongside  the  altar  were  two 
pieces  of  cut  quartz  which  evidently  once  represented 
the  moon. 

I should  say  that  they  were  carved  by  the  same 
artist  who  made  the  stools.  Close  to  the  altar  were 
three  smaller  stones  which  they  called  Eshu  (devil), 
and  in  a little  clearing  in  the  bush  were  two  large  pear- 

1 Called  by  Togun  Orunmila. 

Bini  for  Orisha. 


n CREATION  AND  SACRED  STONES  AT  IFE  27 

shaped  stones  which  they  called  Orisha  Omu,  meaning 
breast,  udder.  Near  to  the  palace  of  the  Oni  of  Ife 
there  is  a well  which  is  said  to  have  no  bottom,  and 
they  said  this  was  not  made  by  man  but  by  the 
Orisha  Olokorogbo. 


CHAPTER  III 


DEATH,  BURIAL,  AND  DEPARTED  SPIRITS  ORO 
EGUNGUN,  ETC. 

Egun. 

Iro,  Oro,  Egun,  Egungun,  and  Eleko,  are  all  now 
Orishas  representing  the  spirits  of  their  ancestors, 
and  it  is  during  festivities  connected  with  them  that 
the  “ bull-roarer  ” appears.  At  Ilaro  I noticed  three 
trees  with  all  their  branches  cut  off1  and  the  bark 

1 Note  by  Adesola  in  the  Nigerian  Chronicle. 

The  whole  company  of  gods  and  men  proceed  outside  to  what  is  called 
the  Oro  pagi  (Oro  kills  the  tree)  or  Oro  jegi  (Oro  eats  the  tree)  ceremony. 
For  its  performance  the  newly  deified  takes  the  company  to  the  highest 
tree  in  the  neighbourhood  in  order  to  show  proof  of  its  divinity  by  “ eating  ” 
up  every  leaf  thereon  to  the  latest  shoot.  At  a convenient  distance  from 
this  tree  gods  and  men  accommodate  themselves  as  best  as  possible — 
the  gods  crying  with  all  their  might  and  the  men  drumming  very  loudly, 
singing  and  dancing  at  the  same  time.  As  it  is  not  permitted  to  the  un- 
initiated to  know  how  this  spirit  feat  is  performed,  suffice  it  to  say  that  one 
wakes  up  in  the  morning  to  see  that  particular  tree  completely  denuded  of 
its  leaves  : and  it  will  require  the  service  of  the  most  powerful  microscope 
to  discover  even  the  tiniest  and  latest  shoot  anywhere  about  the  tree  up  to 
the  loftiest  branch  or  on  the  surrounding  surface  or  anywhere  about  the 
vicinity  of  the  tree.  These  leaves  are  supposed  to  have  been  literally 
eaten  up  by  the  god.  “A  ki  ri  ajeku  Oro”  (No  mortal  ever  sees  the 
fragments  of  food  devoured  by  the  Oro  god)  has  now  passed  into  a by- 
word. Suspended  on  this  tree  between  any  two  of  its  branches  which  are 
topmost,  or  sometimes  left  streaming  on  one  of  the  branches  which  is  the 
highest,  is  a new  mat  or  a white  or  red  piece  of  cloth.  In  rare  but 
important  cases  the  cloth  is  stretched  from  the  branch  of  this  particular 


Tree  Planted  over  Grave  which  thus  becomes  Sacred. 

[Face  p.  28. 


ch.  tn  DEATH,  BURIAL,  AND  DEPARTED  SPIRITS  29 

round  each  stumped  branch  curled  like  a frill  around 
it.  On  the  top  of  each  tree  was  a white  flag.  It 
was  down  these  trees,  I was  told,  that  the  spirit  of 
the  departed  came  to  visit  his  relations.  One  of  the 
chiefs  of  Ilaro  had  died  some  days  before,  and  so, 
when  I arrived  there,  people  playing  drums  kept 
passing  through  the  market  on  their  way  to  the  late 
chief’s  house.  Just  before  dark,  as  the  market  people 
were  assembling,  an  “ Egun  ” presented  himself  before 
my  tent,  and  told  me  that  he  was  the  father  (deceased) 
come  from  heaven,  and  what  was  I going  to  give  him. 
The  men,  they  said,  knowT  that  the  Egun  is  a man 

tree  to  that  of  another  tree  or  trees  in  the  same  neighbourhood  or  at  the 
nearest  or  furthest  corner.  You  see  it  floating  in  mid-space  high  up  in 
the  air.  What  these  mats  or  cloths  are  intended  to  symbolise  ought  to 
be  evident  from  what  I had  pointed  out  in  a previous  article.  [In  the 
Nigerian  Chroniclei\  Unlike  the  Egungnn  (No.  II)  and  Agemo  (No.  IV) 
the  incarnated  form  of  the  Oro  is  never  habited  in  cloths  and  mats. 
What  its  nature  and  habiliments  are  is  supposed  to  be  a mystery  and 
jealously  guarded  up  to  the  present  from  the  gaze  of  women.  In  fact  Oro 
is  worshipped  more  in  its  inane  and  spiritual  form  than  in  a materialised 
shape.  It  is  to  the  former  that  sacrifices  are  offered,  not  to  the  latter. 
Among  the  Egbas  who  are  the  originators  of  this  cult,  the  Oro  awe 
ceremony  is  the  only  funeral  rite  performed  in  connection  with  this 
worship  when  the  spirit  is  supposed  to  pass  from  the  “unburied”  (No.  Ill) 
into  the  “ buried  ” state.  Viewing  it  in  this  connection  the  mat  or  cloths 
suspended  on  the  tree  must  be  taken  to  represent  the  mats  or  cloth  with 
which  the  dead  was  buried  ; and  its  suspension  to  signify  that  the  spirit 
of  the  deceased  now  purified  with  funeral  rites  and  having  entered  into 
that  stage  of  spirit  life  in  which  it  can  be  invoked  and  worshipped,  casts 
behind  it  in  its  flight  into  the  spirit  world  these  earthly  encumbrances  as 
being  useless  to  it. 

After  the  completion  of  this  Oro-pagi  ceremony  they  (gods  and  men) 
again  repair  to  the  house  ; and  having  regaled  themselves  with  the 
remnants,  they  re-form  into  a procession,  remove  the  ynariwo  from  the 
gate,  march  direct  for  the  Aborts  and  thence  to  their  own  house  ere 
break  of  day.  In  the  morning  the  inmates  return  to  the  houses  of 
mourning,  set  a mark  to  the  dedicated  spot,  and  congratulate  one 
another  that  the  departed  had  passed  into  the  Oro  stage  and  can  be 
invoked  at  any  time  for  worship. 


30 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


dressed  up,  but  they  respect  the  dress  and  keep 
up  the  play  for  the  sake  of  the  women-folk  whom, 
they  say,  need  this  assurance  (that  the  chief  has 
risen  from  the  dead).  This  Egun  wore  top  boots 
made  by  the  Hausa.  He  also  wore  pants  instead 
of  the  native  cloth.  His  shirt  and  overcloth  were 
of  a rich  texture,  but  not  different  from  that  worn 
by  the  well-to-do.  But  he  wore  a net-like  mask 
in  front  of  his  face  which  gave  him  a weird  appearance. 
Men  and  boys  followed  him,  and  seemed  to  be  much 
impressed  when  the  Egun  cried  out  in  a voice 
evidently  not  his  own  : “I  am  from  heaven,  therefore 
you  must  respect  me.” 

When  an  important  man  dies  in  these  parts,  his 
relations  wash  his  body,  and  then  shave  off  all  hair. 
Then  they  smear  the  body  over  with  redwood  and 
water.  The  body  is  now  placed  on  a mat  on  the 
ground.  The  two  big  toes  are  tied  together,  and 
the  hands  are  placed  on  the  chest.  The  mouth  and 
nostrils  are  filled  with  cotton  wool.  Each  of  the 
children  of  the  deceased  then  brings  a fine  cloth  and 
covers  the  body.  Then  they  call  all  the  people,  who 
come  and  condole  with  them.  If  the  deceased’s 
daughter  has  a little  one,  it  is  this  grandchild  who  sits 
near  to  the  deceased’s  bed  and  fans  him.  During  the 
night  they  have  four  or  five  lights  burning.  People 
from  all  around  come  playing  the  gong-gong  drums. 
They  remain  all  night  and  are  given  food  and  drink  by 
the  children  of  the  deceased.  Among  the  rich  this 
feasting  is  kept  up  for  seven  days  before  the  body  is 
buried.  If  the  deceased  has  left  a married  daughter, 


hi  DEATH,  BURIAL  AND  DEPARTED  SPIRITS  31 

it  is  her  husband  who  digs  the  grave.  He  gets  ten 
or  twenty  men  to  help  him,  and  pays  them  in  goods. 
On  the  evening  before  the  burial  the  son  and 
daughter  give  money  to  buy  a sheep  or  goat.  Then 
they  take  the  corpse  to  the  grave,  and  having  placed 
the  body  in  it  the  goat  or  sheep  is  killed  over  it,  so 
that  the  blood  falls  upon  it.  The  sons  and  daughters 
must  next  weep  so  that  their  tears  may  also  fall  on 
the  corpse.  The  grave  is  then  filled  in. 

Regarding  these  expenses  Adesola  writes  : 

“ Otalelegbeje  ro  gba 
Omo  re  a san  ligbehin  o 

The  amount  you  have  received 
Will  some  day  be  paid  by  your  children.' 

“ [Otalegbeje  is  1460  cowries,  or  36  strings  and 
a half.  It  is  not  intended  to  be  interpreted 
literally.  One  of  the  many  things  which  contribute 
to  the  heaviness  of  funeral  expenses  in  Yorubaland 
is  the  amount  that  must  be  paid  the  various  social, 
religious  and  political  guilds  to  which  the  deceased 
is  attached,  apart  from  presents  of  yams,  oil,  goats, 
and  other  cattle  and  provisions  which  must  be  made 
at  some  definite  time  after  interment  or  during  the 
celebration  of  the  funeral  ceremonies.  The  amount 
is  for  making  etutu  (propitiatory  sacrifices)  for  the 
dead  ; the  provisions  to  maintain  the  members  when 
they  meet.  There  is  no  native  but  belongs  to  one 
or  another  of  these  guilds.  Some  belong  to  several 
and  a man’s  rank  is  estimated  according  to  the 
guild  or  guilds  to  which  he  belongs.  Whatever 
amount  remains  after  the  necessary  expenses  are 
made  is  distributed  among  the  members  and  every 


32 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


individual  is  given  a portion,  however  small,  in 
proportion  to  his  official  status.  The  enjoyment  of 
this  benefit  is  regarded  as  an  accumulated  debt  for 
every  individual  and  imposes  an  obligation  upon 
their  children  to  make  similar  contribution  to  the 
guild  towards  their  parents’  funerals  at  their  deaths. 
This  song  repeated  at  funerals  is  to  keep  them 
always  in  recollection  of  this  fact.  This  expense  is 
always  heaviest  in  connection  with  the  Ogboni 
(Senatorial)  Society.  This  is  both  a political,  social 
and  a secret  Society.  In  fact  it  is  the  King’s  chief 
consultative  chamber  in  all  matters  and  its  principal 
members  form  the  Cabinet.  They  lay  the  corpse 
with  full  masonic  rites.  In  their  passage  to  and  from 
the  house  of  mourning,  they  sound  alarms  with 
their  state  drums  of  various  height  and  sounds  so 
that  every  woman  or  uninitiated  man  might  flee  their 
presence  either  in  the  street  or  in  the  house  of 
mourning.  For  a woman  to  see  them  or  their 
drum  (in  the  old  days)  meant  death  ; for  an  uninitiated 
man  a very  heavy  fine  with  compulsory  initiation. 
During  the  process  of  corpse-laying  they  continue 
beating  their  drums  and  so  at  intervals  whilst  the 
corpse  is  still  lying  in  state  when  they  go  to  make 
their  etutu.  At  each  time  they  are  generally  pro- 
vided with  palm  wine  and  native  beer.  The 
members  are  sometimes  called  Oshugbo.  A few 
elderly  women  are  always  admitted  and  these  are 
generally  distinguished  from  others  by  having 
certain  cotton  strings  (okun)  tied  round  their  wrists  : 
such  women  are  supposed  to  be  for  ever  precluded 
from  marriage.  Members  of  this  Society  some- 
times professed  Christianity  in  order  to  free  their 
children  from  the  above  obligation.]” 


Members  oe  a Funeral  Secret  Society  in  I.agos  called 

Adamorisha,  wearing  dresses  similar  to  the  “ Poro  House. 

Egungun,  Egun. 


in  DEATH,  BURIAL  AND  DEPARTED  SPIRITS  33 

They  present  all  who  condole  with  them  with  kola, 
gin,  rum,  or  palm  wine.  In  the  olden  days,  if  they 
had  not  the  money,  they  would  rather  sell  themselves 
to  be  able  to  stand  the  expense  than  not  entertain  in  a 
fitting  manner.  They  would  work  one  week  for  their 
owner,  and  one  week  for  themselves  until  they  had 
saved  sufficient  to  redeem  themselves. 

To  prove  to  the  women  folk  that  man  rises  and  goes 
to  heaven  a person  is  placed  in  a private  room.  Then 
when  all  the  family  is  assembled  in  an  adjoining  room 
someone  will  strike  the  ground  three  times  with  a 
stick  crying  out,  “ Father  ! Father!  Father  ! Answer 
me.”  And  the  Egun,  the  person  in  the  room,  answers 
and  every  one  rejoices.  Food  has  been  placed  in  the 
Egun’s  room  by  the  women,  and  when  the  Egun  has 
answered  each  guest  goes  in  there  and  helps  himself 
as  he  or  she  likes.  The  Egun  is  not  dressed  up  when 
in  this  room,  but  if  he  wishes  to  go  outside  and  join  in 
the  dancing  then  he  dresses  himself  and  puts  on  his 
mask. 

Oro  or  the  Bull  Roarer. 

Colonel  Ellis  (p.  3,  The  Yorub a- speaking  Peoples) 
writes,  “ Just  as  Egungun  is  now  used  for  social 
purposes,  and  to  preserve  order  in  private  life,  so 
is  Oro  used  for  political  purposes,  to  preserve  order 
in  the  community  at  large  ; yet,  from  the  analogy 
of  other  peoples,  and  from  the  fact  that  it  is  death 
for  a woman  to  see  the  instrument  which  produces 
the  voice  of  Oro,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  Oro 
was  the  spirit  that  presided  at  the  celebration  of 


D 


34 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


male  mysteries,  such  as  are  found  among  the 
Kurnai  of  Australia,  and  he  has  perhaps  been 
diverted  from  his  proper  purpose  by  the  influence 
of  the  Ogboni.” 

A story  which  rather  bears  out  the  phallic  origin 
of  Oro  is  as  follows  : — 

Another  name  for  Oro  is  Iro,  a chimpanzee  or 
slave  of  a rich  man.  His  master  had  no  child, 
and  so,  when  he  bought  Oro,  he  asked  him  what 
work  he  could  do.  Oro  said  that  the  only  work 
he  knew  how  to  do  was  to  offer  sacrifice  to  the 
Orishas.  And  promised  his  master  that  if  he 
would  allow  him  to  do  this  kind  of  work  only  he 
would  see  that  he  got  a child.  Then  Oro  went 
to  search  for  camwood  and  made  two  flat  pins. 
In  these  he  made  holes  at  the  end  and  tied  strings 
to  them.  And  anyone  who  heard  the  sound  when 
he  whizzed  them  through  the  air  had  children. 
Then  his  master  had  children  also  and  asked  Oro 
what  he  would  take  for  the  good  work  he  had 
done  for  him.  He  asked  for  a ram  and  pito 1 
and  that  is  why  the  Oro  cries,  “ Mu  de  lewe,  lewe, 
lewe,  lewe”  (“I  come  with  young,  young,  young”). 
And  now  his  worshippers  sacrifice  ram,  dog,  and 
pito,  and  never  eat  dog  and  horse.  And  he  who 
offends  him  brings  a dog  as  an  offering.  But  his 
followers  will  not  eat  it.  When  his  master  had 
some  children  Oro  killed  one  and  ate  it.  Then 
the  master  asked  him  : “ Why  did  you  kill  my  child 
and  eat  it  ? ” Then  Oro  ran  away  and  lived  in 


1 Corn  beer. 


hi  DEATH,  BURIAL  AND  DEPARTED  SPIRITS  35 

the  forests  and  became  a chimpanzee,1  and  from 
that  time  he  was  called  Iro  Omo  Nenun  the 
chimpanzee,  the  child  of  Nenun. 

And  now  if  anyone  wants  a child  from  Oro 
he  will  get  a ram  and  pito  and  take  it  to  the  forests 
and  call  him  three  times  “ O-o-oro,  O-o-oro,  O-o-oro.” 
The  third  time  he  answers,  “ Mu  de  lewe,  lewe,  lewe.” 

All  the  people  went  to  Nenun  and  asked  him 
where  his  slave  “Oro”  had  gone?  He  said  to 
the  bush.  He  did  his  best  to  get  him  to  come 
back  but  he  would  not.  So  when  men  want  a 


1 Nigerian  Chronicle. 

Adesola’s  Version  of  the  Iro  Story. 

“An  ape  (Iro)  who  had  the  power  of  transforming  itself  into  a human 
being  made  love  during  one  of  his  transformations  with  a woman  who  was 
in  the  habit  of  collecting  jungle  products  for  the  market.  Several 
children  (boys)  were  the  result  of  this  amorous  affection.  Their  ren- 
dezvous was  a retreat  in  the  woods  where  the  ape  who  often  came  in  the 
guise  of  a hunter  signalled  his  approach  and  arrival  by  means  of  what 
now  becomes  the  Oro  spirit  cry.  For  the  amusement  of  his  children  and 
to  give  them  a dance,  he  beat  his  breast  fora  drum.  The  sound  of  it  was 
what  is  now  imitated  by  the  Obete  and  Asipelu  drums  used  whenever  an 
Oro  function  takes  place.  He  greatly  enriched  both  wife  and  children  by 
means  of  the  product  of  the  chase,  the  latter  of  whom  also  embraced  his 
profession.  He  ultimately  retained  his  human  form  and  at  his  death  was 
buried  on  the  spot  which  was  their  meeting  place.  Having  shown  him- 
self a very  extraordinary  personage  during  his  lifetime,  he  was  worshipped 
as  a god  after  his  death  ; and  whenever  his  children  would  invoke  his 
manes  they  produce  the  same  sound  by  the  same  means  and  beat  the 
same  drums  as  their  father  was  in  the  habit  of  producing  and  beating.” 

This  story  evidently  is  an  invention  with  a purpose.  It  is  to  explain  the 
Oro  as  a deified  spirit ; only  it  makes  it  the  deified  spirit  of  one  individual 
rather  than  of  many.  The  tradition  of  the  man  ape  is  to  give  it  (the  Oro) 
a divine  origin  ; for  apes  and  other  species  of  that  genus  are  sacred 
animals  in  the  Yoruba  country.  Parents  of  twins  and  people  who  worship 
Ibeje  (the  twin  gods)  will  never  kill  or  eat  monkeys,  as  twins  are  supposed 
to  be  the  transformations  of  these  creatures  that  often  displace  the  foetus 
of  children.  The  derivation  of  Oro  from  Iro  as  explained  by  the  above 
tradition  cannot  therefore  hold. 


I)  2 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


36 

child  now  they  first  bring  the  ram  and  pito  to  the 
Oro  grave,1  and  ask  Nenun  to  take  the  offering 
to  Oro.  The  reason  why  women  may  not  see 
Iro  is  that  having  killed  the  child,  they  told  the 
mother  that  the  child  was  lost  and  so  deceived  her 
but  they  took  Oro’s  clothes  from  him  so  that  he 
was  naked,  and  ashamed  to  see  women. 

Women  run  away  because  his  master  has  punished 
Oro  by  not  allowing  him  to  wear  clothes  and  return 
to  town.  It  is  not  Oro  but  only  his  symbol  that 
comes  to  town. 

The  flat  piece  of  camwood  is  called  Ishe  and 


1 Nigerian  Chronicle , September  10th,  1909. 

Burial  Customs  in  the  Yoruba  Country  by  Adesola 
Oro's  grove  is  a sanctum  sanctorum  and  no  one,  whatever  be  his  rank 
or  status  dare  enter  it  unless  he  is  a devotee  and  that  on  special  and 
rather  rare  occasions.  As  a matter  of  fact  it  brooks  no  interference  ; and 
wherever  and  whenever  an  Oro  cry  is  heard  no  Egungun  or  Eluku  dare 
cry  there  at  the  same  time.  It  is  regarded  as  the  chief  of  the  spirit  gods 
and  it  maintains  its  awe  and  dignity  intact  even  under  modern  conditions. 
Apart  from  the  rites  and  ceremonies  performed  in  the  grove,  there  are 
other  demonstrations  performed  in  the  public  ; but  from  all,  whether  done 
within  the  grove  or  without  it,  women  are  rigidly  excluded.  All  males 
from  the  baby  at  the  back  to  the  centenarian  have  access  to  the 
witnessing  of  its  public  demonstrations.  I have  made  independent 
inquiries  from  several  people  who  are  Egba-born  whether  that  special 
privilege,  that  is  extended  to  some  elderly  women,  called  Iya  Agan,  of 
initiation  into  the  Egungun  mysteries  is  ever  granted  to  any  woman  in 
the  Oro  mysteries  and  in  each  instance  have  received  a negative  reply. 
One  gentleman  alone  it  was  who  told  me  this  privilege  was  conceded  to 
his  late  grandmother  but  I have  every  reason  to  doubt  his  veracity.  It 
was  reported  of  that  wealthy  Egba  woman  who  gave  a name  to  one  of  our 
public  Squares  in  Lagos  with  some  of  its  buildings  that  on  her  return  to 
her  native  country  she  offered  to  buy  the  exceptional  privilege  of  being 
initiated  into  the  mysteries  of  this  spirit  god  and  of  gaining  itsacquaintance, 
To  this  end  she  used  all  the  influence  her  great  wealth  gave  her,  but  she 
had  to  spend  an  equal  if  not  a greater  amount  to  recant  and  that  within 
doors  and  on  her  knees  when  the  god  and  his  attendants  came  in  front 
of  her  compound  to  accept  the  invitation. 


hi  DEATH,  BURIAL  AND  DEPARTED  SPIRITS  37 

the  string  is  called  Asho  Oro  or  Oro’s  Cloth.  The 
stick  to  which  the  string  is  tied  is  called  Papa  Oro, 
Oro’s  stick. 

Another  form  is  the  Agbe  which  is  a piece  of 
flat  wood  about  two  feet  long  attached  to  a string 
tied  to  a ball  of  cloth,  grass,  or  string  called  Ibowo 
Oro,  Oro’s  handle. 

I she  represents  a young  man,  but  Agbe  a full 
grown  man. 

Ishe  is  that  which  makes.  Agbe  is  that  which  lives. 
And  my  informant  told  me  that  they  were  symbols 
of  the  Phallus. 

Oro  is  a man’s  Orisha,  and  all  men  should  worship 
him. 

H e was  the  first  man  slave  bought  from  God  by 
Nenun,  therefore  men  should  recognise  and  worship 
him,  as  the  giver  of  children. 

When  a person  dies  the  relations  cry  out,  “ Oro 
o Baba  o,”  because  Oro  was  the  first  Orisha  and 
first  father  who  caused  men  to  have  children.  To 
refer  to  the  living  father  is  not  solemn  enough  ; 
the  death  cry  refers  to  their  first  father  Oro. 

The  calling  of  Oro  by  the  Ogbonis  is  only  to 
frighten  women  away,  as  they  do  not  wish  them  to 
see  how  they  execute  a criminal. 

Mr.  Pellegrin  told  me  that  when  the  first  yams 
are  ready  the  Egba  worshipped  Oro.  No  woman 
enters  the  Oro  bush,  and  if  he  comes  out  night  or 
day  the  women  must  go  indoors.  A ram  is  killed 
and  cooked,  and  its  head  is  placed  on  the  wall  near 
to  the  worshipper’s  father’s  grave. 


38 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


They  draw  a figure  of  a man  in  white  chalk  on 
the  wall  near  the  grave,  to  represent  the  departed. 
It  is  on  this  figure  that  they  hang  the  head  of  the 
ram.  And  a stranger  will  know  if  the  head  has  not 
been  replaced  each  year. 

They  used  to  appoint  a man  called  Ologbo  Ijeun, 
the  chief  of  the  Oro  ceremony,  who  noted  the  seasons 
and  appointed  the  time  for  the  beginning  of  Oro 
ceremony, 

In  the  “Head  Hunters”  Dr.  Haddon  gives  a 
description  of  the  Malu  ceremonies,1  and  I am  sure 
that  any  of  us  who  have  seen  Oro  will  be  quite 
ready  to  recognise  the  masked  Zogole  as  some  very 
near  relation. 

This  Malu  ceremony,  however,  has  to  do  with  the 
initiation  of  youths  to  certain  male  mysteries,  while 
our  Oro,  as  figured  by  the  bull  roarer,  is  said  not  only 
to  be  the  giver  of  children,  but  to  arrest  disease  and 
sickness,  and  prevent  so  many  people  dying.  In  this 
it  more  nearly  represents  the  “ Maduh  ” (p.  107)  that 
used  to  “ turn  devil  ” at  night  time,  and  go  round  the 
the  gardens,  and  swing  bull  roarers  to  make  the  yams 
grow.  Or  perhaps  Uvio  is  still  more  like  our  Oro, 
for  “if  anyone  is  sick,  food  is  given  to  Uvio,  who  is 
placed  on  the  top  of  a big  house  (clarino)  and  he 
is  addressed  ‘Oh!  Uvio,  finish  the  sickness  of  our 
dear  one,  and  give  life.’  ” 

It  is  strange  that  the  Yoruba  do  not  connect 
“ Oro  ” with  the  male  mysteries,  when  it  is  so  openly 

1 Vols.  V.  and  VI.  Reports  of  Cambridge  Expedition  to  Torres 
Straits. 


iii  DEATH,  BURIAL  AND  DEPARTED  SPIRITS  39 

a male  ceremony,  but  of  many  people  I have  asked 
some  say  they  have  never  heard  of  Oro  in  this  connec- 
tion, and  others  will  not  hear  of  any  such  thing  being 
mentioned.  I say  strange,1  because  the  bull  roarer  is 
certainly  used  at  Ovia’s  yearly  festival  in  Benin  terri- 
tory, at  which  as  certainly  youths  are  initiated  into  the 
male  mysteries.  It  is  also  used  in  the  worship  of 
Ovato  at  Geduma,  and  during  the  Ebomici  festival 
and  Ihoho  dance  at  Ugo,  both  also  in  the  Benin 
Kingdom,  which,  as  you  may  be  aware,  is  a King- 
dom adjoining  the  Yoruba  conntry  and  said  to 
have  been  founded  by  a son  of  a Yoruba  Oni  of  Ife. 
But  it  may  be  that  while  “ Oro  ” is  present  on  these 
occasions  it  is  only  as  a deterrent  to  women  and  others 
not  to  pry  into  the  secrets  of  the  Orisha,  or  so-called 
Deity. 

At  Igbore  the  Oro  festival  is  held  always  about 
September,  and  it  is  at  this  time  that  members  are 
initiated  into  the  secrets  of  the  fraternity.  Certain 
youths  known  to  be  capable  of  keeping  secrets  are 
chosen  as  novices. 

The  Oro  of  the  Bini  is  known  as  Oloawon  Ovato 
Oloawon  Ovia,  and  Usaokwhaiyi,  that  is  the  Oloawon 
in  connection  with  the  Orishas  Ovato,  Ovia  and 
Okwhaiyi. 

Oloawon  means  the  owner  of  the  turtle  or  tortoise,2 
the  essence  of  deceit  and  meanness.  He  is  described 
as  one  who  is  constantly  deceiving  men  and  other 
animals,  and  leading  them  to  their  death  by  making 

1 See  At  the  Back  of  the  Black  Alan's  Mind,  page  21 1. 

2 The  turtle  is  called  the  sea-tortoise. 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


40 

use  of  secrets  with  which  he  has  been  entrusted.  He 
leads  women  also  to  seduction  and  other  crimes. 

To  prove  that  boys  are  not  like  women  and  the 
tortoise,  such  as  are  chosen  as  novices  to  be  initiated 
into  the  secrets  of  the  fraternity  of  Ovia  or  Ovata  are 
first  given  a supposed  secret  to  keep.  After  a time 
if  it  is  found  that  the  boys  have  not  told  even  their 
mothers  anything  about  it,  they  are  tried  again  and 
again,  seven  times  in  all,  when,  if  considered  trust- 
worthy, they  are  taken  to  the  Orisha’s  grove  at  the 
beginning  of  the  yearly  festival,  and  gradually  taught 
the  secrets  of  the  craft.  The  Festival  of  Ovia 
continues  for  some  three  months,  and  at  the  end  of 
this  time  Oloawon  (or  Oro)  comes  down  for  seven 
days,  and  Ovia  is  then  said  to  be  dead  until  next  year. 
During  these  seven  days  women  are  not  allowed  out- 
side their  houses. 

Anyone  at  other  times  of  the  year  is  allowed  to 
enter  the  grove  or  temple  of  Ovia,  and  to  ask  its  help 
to  destroy  his  or  her  enemies.  If  the  enemy  has  done 
something  worthy  of  death,  Ovia  gives  him  a certain 
medicine  in  the  making  up  of  which  parts  of  the 
tortoise  or  turtle  are  used.1  The  criminal  is  said  to 
swell  up  and  die. 

It  is  interesting  in  this  connection  to  read  in  the 
Head  Hunters  (page  106) : “ Before  going  out 

turtling  the  men  marched  round  the  Agu  and  whirled 
the  ‘ bull  roarers  ’ alway  circling  clockwise.” 

When  a great  man  dies  the  “ Ogboni  ” 2 go  and 

1 Vol.  V.  of  Cambridge  Expedition  to  Torres  Straits. 

2 Native  council. 


hi  DEATH,  BURIAL  AND  DEPARTED  SPIRITS  41 

lay  him  out  and  help  to  bury  him.  On  their  way  they 
cry  out  ‘ Ehpa  Ogboni  Enu  ! Enu  ! ” translated  to  me 
as  : — The  Ogboni  are  coming,  catch  him  ! catch  him ! 
(referring  to  anyone  they  may  find  outside  their 
houses).  When  they  have  buried  the  defunct  Oro 
comes. 

When  the  “ Ogboni  ” are  holding  a palaver  or  try- 
ing a case  they  beat  certain  tunes  on  a drum  ; if  they 
condemn  the  person  to  death,  the  tune  beaten  on  the 
drum  is  changed  to  Oro  1 and  all  the  people  know  of 

1 Nigerian  Chronicle , 17th  September. 

Burial  Customs  in  the  Yoruba  Country. 

Oro  or  Spirit-  Worship  among  the  Egbas. 

By  Adesola. 

The  political  aspect  of  Oro  Worship. 

Oro  worship  has  a political  side.  The  god  assisted  the  State  to  give 
capital  punishment  to  criminals  in  return  for  services  rendered  it  by  the 
state.  As  with  punishment  meted  out  by  its  companion  gods,  social 
disgrace  follows  because  of  its  implications.  The  Oro  decapitates  (pa) 
in  which  case  the  head  of  the  criminal  is  nailed  to  a tree  as  a warning  to 
others  ; or  takes  away  ( gbe ) the  criminal,  body  and  soul,  out  of  the  arena 
of  life  when  neither  the  living  man  nor  the  lifeless  is  ever  seen  after.  To 
the  shades  of  such  criminals  no  funeral  honours  are  given,  no  shrines 
erected,  no  worship  paid.  Their  spirits  are  supposed  to  be  doomed  to 
roam  eternally  outside  the  spirit  world.  With  the  Oro  they  revisit  the 
earth  on  festive  occasions  only  to  wander  about  in  corner  places.  Hence 
they  are  called  Pakoko  (loiterers  in  the  corner).  They  are  often  referred 
to  as  Eru  Oro  (Oro  slaves).  For  these  reasons  an  Egba  man  would 
quickly  resent  the  imprecation  Oro  re  ma  gbe  e or  Oro  re  ma  pa  e (May 
you  fall  a prey  to  the  Oro  god). 

The  Oro  is  also  employed  as  an  instrument  of  banishment.  If  the 
state  considers  it  expedient  to  expel  anyone  from  the  country  and  the 
authorities  find  themselves  powerless  to  accomplish  the  object,  they 
concede  the  business  to  the  Oro  god.  As  soon  as  ready,  an  Oro 
confinement  is,  declared,  i.e.  every  woman  is  to  keep  within  doors.  The 
gods  then  begin  to  walk  the  streets  (Oro  gbode).  As  many  of  them 
surround  the  house  of  the  individual  giving  out  their  weird  cries  ; and 
eventually  the  man  is  heard  miles  off  away  from  the  town.  He  is  then 
said  to  be  banished  by  the  Oro  (won  Ji  Oro  le  nilu). 

In  times  of  great  political  crisis  or  whenever  the  state  would  undertake 


42 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


their  decision.  When  some  of  the  “ Ogboni  ” 
belong  to  the  Oro  fraternity  they  can  call  “ Oro  ” out 
and  there  is  no  doubt  that  at  times  they  have  abused 
this  privilege. 

After  witnessing  the  Egungun  ceremony  already 
described,  a semi-educated  native,  who  evidently 
thought  he  had  got  me  in  a favourable  position  to 
annoy,  volunteered  the  statement  that  the  Government 
for  some  reason  or  other  would  not  allow  Oro  to  kill 
inquisitive  women  he  found  out  of  doors  and  that  in 
consequence  they  were  getting  quite  out  of  hand. 
What  were  they  to  do  ? I looked  at  that  semi-educated 
barbarian  who  had  certainly  been  sufficiently  in  touch 
with  civilisation  to  know  exactly  why  the  Government 
put  down  this  class  of  murder,  and  suggested  that  he 
should  write  to  the  “ Society  for  the  Protection  of 
Aborigines.”  (This  class  of  native  has  got  to  look  upon 
this  Society  as  something  a little  more  powerful  than 
the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Colonies  and  the 
Government  he  represents,  and  appeals  to  it  in  some 
cases  after  appealing  to  the  Secretary  of  State  to 
redress  some  fancied  grievance.) 

Mr.  Pellegrin  remembers  how  on  one  occasion  Oro 
was  called  “ accidentally  ” at  Abeokuta  when  three  men 

the  consideration  of  any  new  law  or  measure  that  will  seriously  affect  the 
several  sections  of  the  country,  an  Oro  confinement  is  also  declared.  The 
streets  being  thus  cleared  of  traffic  and  women  save  such  as  are  carried 
on  under  the  circumstances  by  the  men,  the  several  heads  and  sub-heads 
of  the  various  townships  often  travel  to  attend  conference.  Any  decision 
arrived  at  in  this  assembly  becomes  law  and  is  considered  binding  on  the 
whole  country.  Confinements  are  again  declared  whenever  a state 
sacrifice  is  to  be  offered  on  behalf  of  the  town.  In  this  instance  the  gods 
parade  the  streets  and  the  dull  monotony  which  would  have  prevailed  is 
relieved  by  singing,  dancing  and  other  Oro  displays. 


hi  DEATH,  BURIAL  AND  DEPARTED  SPIRITS  43 

were  to  be  executed.  Jaguna  the  executioner  killed 
the  first,  killed  the  second  and  when  he  got  to  the 
third,  who  was  the  youngest  of  them,  his  cutlass  would 
not  cut.  He  tried  it  three  times  without  success,  so  he 
went  back  to  his  seat  and  got  a revolver  and  shot  him 
in  the  head.  The  young  man  cried  out  and  put  his 
hand  to  his  head  and  took  the  bullet  and  said,  “ Jaguna, 
here  is  your  bullet.”  Jaguna  then  fired  into  the  young 
man’s  ear.  He  shook  his  head  and  the  bullet 
dropped  out  of  his  other  ear  into  his  hand.  He  gave 
the  bullet  to  Jaguna.  Then  the  people  cried  out 
Oro  and  the  women  ran  away.  Then  the  people 
hacked  the  criminal  to  pieces  with  their  knives. 
These  criminals  had  been  condemned  to  death  for 
selling  salt  to  the  Ibadan,  then  the  enemies  of  the 
Egbas. 

Asani,  who  says  he  remembers  the  tragedy,  declares 
that  three  days  afterwards  the  third  culprit  was  seen  by 
him  in  the  town,  and  that  his  people  begged  him  to  go 
away  as  it  was  against  the  law  of  Oro  for  a man  who 
had  been  killed  by  Oro  to  come  to  life  again. 

A man  who  will  not  be  killed  and  lives  in  spite  of 
being  executed  in  this  way  is  called  Ologun  or  a 
medicine  man.  Alateshe,  an  Egba  Chief,  refused  to 
allow  a man  who  had  been  thus  executed  to  be  killed 
again,  as  he  said  some  day  this  rascality  would  save 
them. 

When  the  Egba  go  to  war  and  set  the  Ishe  (Oro) 
whizzing  and  the  enemy  hears  it  he  runs  away. 

Anyone  who  is  an  Oro  worshipper  must  attend  the 
funeral  of  a member  of  the  craft.  The  one  who  is 


44 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


burying  the  worshipper  gives  the  Oro,  a ram,  pito,  and 
kola.  With  the  kola  they  touch  the  dead  man’s  head. 
Then  with  their  fists  closed,  thumbs  inside  and  one 
hand  on  the  other,  they  touch  the  dead  man’s  head 
three  times  and  then  the  head  of  his  son  who 
is  succeeding  him.  They  next  take  the  kola  again 
and  touch  the  dead  man’s  head  three  times  and  then  the 
child’s  head,  asking  the  dead  to  bless  the  living. 
Then  they  kill  the  ram,  and  the  children  of  the 
deceased  rub  their  foreheads  with  the  blood.  This 
sacrifice  is  repeated  every  year  by  the  children,  and 
they  tie  the  head  of  the  ram  on  the  wall  near  to  the 
grave  (in  the  house). 

Talking  of  the  persecution  of  the  early  Christians 
Miss  Tucker,  in  her  book  Abeokuta , writes  : 

“ Idinui  . . . died  in  the  Ake  Mission  house.  His 
master  (Mr.  Hinderer)  obtained  the  consent  of  his 
relatives  and  buried  him  in  the  Christian  burying 
ground  ...  It  was  the  first  case  of  the  death  of  a 
native  convert  ; and  the  Ogboni  who  have  by  law,  it 
appeared,  the  arrangement  and  the  profits  of  all  the 
funerals,  considered  their  right  was  infringed  upon  and 
lost  no  time  in  taking  advantage  of  the  alleged 
misdemeanour.  Six  of  the  converts  were  seized  and 
confined  in  the  Council  House  of  Itoku  . . . Mr. 
Hinderer  . . . procured  their  release  after  five  days  of 
suffering,  not  however  without  severe  scourging. 

“ The  Missionaries  received  intelligence  from 
the  Obashorun  . . . who  was  unvarying  in  the  friend- 
liness of  his  conduct  towards  them,  that  the  Chief  of 
Igbore  was  intending  to  follow  the  example  of  Itoku.” 


hi  DEATH,  BURIAL  AND  DEPARTED  SPIRITS  45 

“ Nothing,”  writes  Mr.,  afterwards  Bishop,  Crowther, 
“ was  omitted  that  could  make  the  circumstances 
appalling  to  the  poor  sufferers  ; Oro  was  called  out 
. . . the  Ogboni  drums  were  beating  furiously  and 
a great  multitude  armed  with  bill  hooks,  clubs  and 
whips  were  catching  and  dragging  our  poor  converts 
to  the  Council  House  . . . The  women  were  cruelly 
scourged  and  pinioned  without  regard  to  age  or  sick- 
ness ; and  while  all  this  was  going  on  in  the  Council 
House,  the  houses  of  the  imprisoned  were  being 
plundered,  their  household  utensils  destroyed,  their 
doors  unhinged  and  carried  away.” 

Page  148. — “The  fear  of  man  kept  back  another 
person  from  becoming  a candidate.” 

“ It  was  a Priestess  who  had  formerly  been  a violent 
opponent  ....  She  feared  lest  if  it  were  known  she 
had  embraced  the  new  Religion  she  should  in  revenge 
be  given  to  Oro,  or  in  other  words  be  murdered.” 
“This  mysterious  power  Oro  is  an  object  of  the 
greatest  dread  to  the  women  of  Abeokuta,  who  are 
forbidden  to  appear  in  the  street  during  any  of  his 
visits  under  pain  of  death.”  (Ibid.,  page  173.) 

The  above  was  written  in  1853.  The  Rev.  R.  H. 
Stone  somewhere  about  the  year  i860  (there  is  no  date 
in  his  book,  “ In  Africa’s  Poorest  and  Jungle,”  neither 
has  the  publisher  given  the  date  of  publication)  says  : 
“ During  my  ten  years’  residence  in  Abeokuta  the 
town  was  frequently  given  to  Oro  and  on  three 
occasions  malefactors  were  punished  and  political 
matters  of  importance  were  transacted.  The  Voice  of 
Oro  was  frequently  heard  in  the  streets  after  dark.  It 


46 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


began  in  a low  moan,  then  rose  to  a kind  of  scream 
and  then  sank  into  a moan.  This  noise  was  made  by 
the  whirling  of  a flat  stick,  but  it  was  a capital  crime 
for  anyone  to  imitate  as  much.1  It  was  a capital  crime, 
also,  for  any  woman  to  remain  in  the  streets  after  the 
voice  of  Oro  was  heard  at  any  time. 

My  friend,  Mr.  John  Parkinson,  collected  two 
versions  of  the  origin  of  Oro,  which  I have  also 
heard,  but  take  the  liberty  of  giving  in  his  own 
words.  (See  “ Man 1906,  66.) 

The  Legend  of  Oro.2 

By  John  Parkinson. 

In  the  olden  days  Olorun  made  six  people, 
four  men  and  two  women,  to  whom  after  a certain 
time  children  were  born,  but  these  children  always 
died. 

And  the  people  said  to  Olorun,  “ O Olorun,  how 
is  this  ; you  made  six  people,  and  although  children 
are  born,  they  never  live  ? ” So  they  said,  “ We 
will  find  out  another  god  who  will  let  the  children 
live.” 

Now  amongst  the  four  men,  two  were  Babalawo 
(a  priesthood  who  used  the  palm  nut  as  a means 
of  divination). 

Then  said  the  Babalawo,  “ Olorun  is  your 
father,  but  you  must  have  some  ‘ idol  ’ 3 to  worship 

1 Small  boys  now  use  it  as  a toy,  1909. 

2 Oro,  the  bull-roarer.  See  Ellis,  The  Yoruba-spcaking  People  of  the 
Slave  Coast  of  West  Africa , 109. 

3 “ Idol,”  used  in  the  sense  of  a visible  and  tangible  object  of  venera- 
tion. 


m DEATH,  BURIAL  AND  DEPARTED  SPIRITS  47 

too.”  The  others  replied,  “We  are  ready,  let 
us  know  the  name  of  this  god  ” ; and  the  Babalawo 
replied,  “It  is  Oro,  you  must  worship  him.” 

So  the  Babalawo  made  the  Oro,  and  brought  it 
to  the  others  and  said,  “You  must  give  food  every 
day.”  They  answered,  “ That  is  good,  but  how 
shall  we  make  him  talk  if  we  want  anything  of 
him  ? ” To  this  the  Babalawo  replied  that  when  the 
food  was  given  the  people  should  dance,  and  sing 
and  clap  their  hands.  And  so  doing,  the  Oro  began 
to  talk,  saying,1  “ Baba  ma  mu-o  ” (“  O father  don’t 
take  them  ”).2  Since  the  people  did  this  none  of 
their  children  died,  but  the  women  were  hidden  in 
the  house.  Slowly  the  numbers  of  the  people 
increased,  and  after  a time  they  thought  they  would 
like  to  have  a king,  and  they  made  a king.  The 
king  said,  “ I will  worship  only  Oro,  the  god  that 
makes  us  populous.” 

When  the  time  for  the  yearly  feast  was  come, 
the  king  gave  a bullock  to  be  killed,  and  he  said, 
“ I am  king,  and  I do  like  a king.  All  my  wives 
are  to  be  present  when  Oro  sings.”  And  the 
wives  were  brought,  and  the  bullock  was  killed,  and 
the  people  danced  and  sang. 

Then  the  king  said,  “ I am  king  ; how  is  it 
that  common  wood  can  talk  and  say 3 ‘ Baba  ma 
mu-o  ’ ? ” 

But  when  Oro  saw  that  women  were  present  he 

1 Approximately  onomatopoetic  of  the  sound  made  by  the  “ Bull- 
roarer.” 

2 The  pronoun  them  is  not  expressed  in  the  original. 

3 “ A woman  was  once  splitting  fire-wood  in  the  streets.  Accidentally 
a chip  of  it  flew  up  and  made  a sound  ; she  took  up  the  piece  and  shewed 
it  to  the  husband,  he  took  it  from  her,  contrived  the  Ise  or  Abe  after  it 
and  ingeniously  evolved  the  Oro  worship. 


48 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


kept  silence.  Then  said  the  two  Babalawo,  “It  is 
against  the  rules  that  women  should  be  present 
when  Oro  is  made,  but  since  you  are  king  we 
could  not  dictate  to  you  at  first,  but  now  you  your- 
self have  proved  that  this  cannot  be  done,  for  Oro 
does  not  cry  where  women  are.  This  is  not  simply 
wood  but  Eru  Male,  the  slave  of  Male  (Male  = 
Oro).” 

And  the  king  said  to  his  wives,  “ Go  home,” 
and  they  went  ; and  the  Babalawo  said,  “ Sing 
again.” 

Then  as  once  more  they  sang,  the  Oro  cried, 
“ Baba  ma  mu-o.”  Hence  it  is  from  that  day  Oro 
is  not  made  in  the  presence  of  women. 

A Second  Legend  of  Oro.  In  the  earliest  time 
six  men  were  made  by  God,  and  the  place  where 
they  lived  was  called  Aking-oro  (full  of  Oro).  In 
those  days  this  place  was  surrounded  by  bush  and 
trees,  and  now  and  again  the  people  could  hear  a 
sound,  or  cry,  of  “ Mamu,  ma  mu,”  and  so  afraid 
were  they  that  they  dared  not  go  into  the  forest. 
On  a certain  day  one  of  them  said,  “ I had 
a dream,  and  in  the  dream  Olorun  said,  ‘ You  must 
go  from  this  place  because  it  is  Aking-oro,  full  of 
Oro.’  ” 

But  they  answered,  “We  will  not  go  from 
here ; we  will  find  animals  and  kill  them  as  a 
sacrifice,  sprinkling  blood  upon  the  ground  to  ap- 
pease Oro.”  This  ceremony  they  carried  out,  but 
the  dreams  came  again,  and,  worst  of  all,  their 
children  died. 

Now  in  those  days  Oro  was  a hunter,  and  Oro 
came  into  their  country.  When  the  people  saw  this 
hunter  they  were  surprised  and  said,  “ Where  do 


hi  DEATH,  BURIAL  AND  DEPARTED  SPIRITS  49 

you  come  from  ; we  thought  there  were  but  six  of 
us?”  Then  Oro  replied,  “ I came  to  tell  you  that 
this  place  belongs  to  me,  and  I will  show  you  a 
spot  where  you  can  see  me  always,”  and  he  showed 
it  to  them  and  they  cleared  it.  He  told  them  that 
when  they  wanted  to  perform  the  ceremony  of 
sacrifice  to  appease  the  spirit  calling  “ Ma  mu,  ma 
mu,”  they  should  sing,  and  he  would  come  and  see 
them  in  the  spot  they  had  cleared.  Moreover,  Oro 
said,  “ When  this  spot  is  cleared,  come  every  seven 
days  and  bring  fowls,  and  sheep,  and  Fufu”  1 (fufu  is 
mashed  yam),  and  they  went  on  the  days  indicated 
and  Oro  came  as  he  had  said. 

When  Oro  had  done  eating  he  said,  “ I will 
make  you  a present.”  Then  said  one,  “ May  I ask 
you  something?  You  are  the  owner  of  this  place, 
and  since  we  have  been  here  we  hear  the  sound  of 
‘ Ma  mu,  ma  mu.’  What  is  this  noise,  since  you  are 
the  owner  of  the  place  ? ” 

And  Oro  replied,  “ I am  the  man  who 
makes  that  noise  every  night.”  Then  he  cut  a 
piece  out  of  his  forearm  and  gave  it  to  them.  But 
they  said,  “ What  shall  we  do  with  it  ? ” Oro  re- 
plied, “ I am  very  old  and  cannot  always  come  here 
every  seven  days,  but  when  you  come,  bore  a hole 
in  the  flesh  and  place  a thread  in  it,  and  when  you 
fling  it  outwards  it  will  cry  like  me,  being  part  of 
me.  Take  care,  moreover,  that  no  woman  comes, 
and  when  you  have  finished  with  the  piece  of  flesh 
put  it  in  the  ground  before  going  home.  You 
dare  not  take  it  to  the  house.  And  you  will  call 
this  place  Ebu  Male  ” (Ebu  = bush,  Male  = a 
name  for  Oro). 

1 Fufu  is  not  a Yoruba  word,  mashed  yam  is  called  “ Iyan.” 


E 


50 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


Then  they  worshipped  Oro  every  seven  days, 
and  the  children  ceased  from  dying,  and  the  people 
multiplied. 

When  they  became  populous  they  elected  a king. 

Now  the  king  had  a wife  whom  he  greatly  loved, 
and  the  wife  said,  “ I know  you  love  me  very  much 
and  I have  a favour  to  ask  of  you.  It  is  this : 
May  I see  the  thing  that  cries  at  night  ? ” And 
the  king  said,  “ It  is  against  the  rules,  but  I will 
let  you  see  it,  for  I love  you  greatly.” 

So  when  the  day  for  the  feast  came  the  king 
had  a big  chair  made  with  a seat  inside  for  the 
woman. 

Arrived  at  the  place  they  made  the  usual  feast, 
and,  as  before,  took  the  flesh  from  the  ground  and 
flung  it  out,  but  there  came  no  sound.  Then  one 
of  the  four  elders  said,  “ Something  is  wrong  here  ; 
the  hunter  said,  ‘ No  woman  must  come,’  or  he 
would  fail  to  answer.  We  have  called  upon  Ita 
(Oro)  but  there  has  been  no  answer,  let  us  look  at 
the  king’s  chair.”  Then  one  went  to  the  king’s 
chair  and  broke  it  and  saw  the  king’s  wife  inside, 
and  they  began  again  to  fling  the  flesh  of  the 
hunter  into  the  air  when  suddenly  the  thread  broke 
and  the  flesh  flew  off  and  cut  the  throat  of  the 
woman. 

Then  said  the  small  piece  of  flesh,  “I  go  to  my 
father  and  will  tell  him  what  I have  seen  here 
to-day,  but  since  you  have  broken  the  rule  I must 
change  myself,  and  on  the  next  feast-day  you  will 
see  what  I have  taken  to  fill  my  place. 

When  all  had  gone  the  piece  of  flesh  told  the 
hunter  what  had  happened,  and  Oro  the  hunter 
came  back,  and  Oro  said,  “Come  to  my  flesh 


iii  DEATH,  BURIAL  AND  DEPARTED  SPIRITS  51 

again,”  and  Oro  cut  a stick  and  tied  a string  to  it 
and  left  it  in  the  ground. 

Then  Oro  departed  from  the  world,  being 
offended  because  a woman  had  seen  part  of  him. 

Note  the  legend  adds  that  Oro  went  into  the 
cam-wood,  hence  any  “ Oro”  made  from  cam-wood 
is  held  to  be  especially  good.  These  stories  of 
Oro,  the  bull-roarer,  do  not  seem  to  be  opposed 
to  Ellis’s  suggestion  that  Oro  was  originally  the 
spirit  presiding  at  male  mysteries,  but  my  carriers 
do  not  know,  or  do  not  admit  this  idea.1 

John  Parkinson 


1 Nigerian  Chronicle , September  yd.  by  Niepos  ara  Orun. 

In  regard  to  derivation  the  word  Oro  is  a purely  onomatopoetic  one 
and  is  derived  from  the  sound  heard  at  the  discovery  of  the  Abe  or  Ise 
of  the  musical  God. 

With  respect  to  the  origin.  Although  I am  neither  a missionary  nor  a 
parson,  but  only  a grandson  of  Oro  worshippers,  I am  almost  ashamed  to 
narrate  the  circumstance  which  led  to  the  apotheosis  of  the  God  of  my 
fathers.  On  a certain  day  in  Orun  (“  Sun  ”),  a town  in  the  Egba  Province 
of  Gbagura,  situated  about  8 miles  from  Ibadan  and  lying  on  the  route 
between  Ijebu  and  Ibadan,  as  a certain  woman  was  splitting  wood  for 
culinary  purposes,  there  flew  from  the  clefts  of  the  wood  something  which 
made  a whizzing  sound  similar  to  the  “ voice  ” of  the  God  Oro.  The 
astonished  woman  looked  round  and  picked  up  that  whizzing  something 
which  corresponded  in  shape  with  the  Ise  or  Abe  now  employed  in  the  wor- 
ship of  the  god.  Her  husband  being  hard  by,  she  shewed  him  the  whizzing 
material  and  said  in  the  dialect  of  “ Orun  ” Ese  ti  o ro  baun  (“  why  did  it 
sound  like  that ?”)  and  the  husband  aiiswered  O ro  be  nani  (“it  simply 
sounded  like  that")  or  something  to  the  effect  which  led  to  the  coining  of 
the  word  Oro.  The  wily  husband  took  the  material  from  her  and  ere 
long  invented  the  Ise  or  Abe,  and  with  the  aid  of  his  companions  the 
mystifying  Oro  worship  was  soon  evolved.  The  old  town  of  Orun  is  now 
called  Podo  or  Oke  orun,  and  is  like  Ibadan  and  a few  other  towns  at  the 
present  time  chiefly  inhabited  by  Oyo  people  after  it  had  been  evacuated 
by  the  Egba  as  a result  of  the  Owu  war  (1821-1830)  which  caused  the 
dispersal  of  the  Egba  people  and  the  destruction  of  the  Egba  towns. 

As  a proof  of  the  truth  of  this  story  of  the  Origin  of  Oro  custom  it  may 
be  stated  here  that  in  the  township  of  Orun  in  Abeokuta  where  the 
remnant  of  the  people  of  old  Orun  now  dwells  since  the  founding  of  Abeo- 


E 2 


52 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


In  each  account  it  says  that  six  beings  were 
made  by  God.  We  shall  note  as  we  proceed  how 
this  number  six  keeps  recurring  as  the  number  of 
the  pairs  of  members  of  the  council  of  different 
Societies. 

Oro  means,  I am  told,  “lamentation,”  such  as 
we  now  hear  at  funerals  ; as  soon  as  the  “ father  ” 
dies,  the  family  cry  out  Epa  ! Oro  o ! Baba  Lo,  /’ oni  o. 
Alas  the  departed  one,  the  father  has  gone  to-day  ! 

In  the  second  version  Oro  comes  to  the  six  as  a 
spirit  of  the  departed  (Ore)  or  as  Oro  is  now  said 
to  come. 

In  this  version  Oro  cuts  a piece  out  of  his  fore- 
arm, but  I heard  that  it  was  another  part  of  his 
anatomy  (and  I must  here  add  that  the  time  has 
not  yet  come  for  the  people  of  this  country  to  be 
quite  frank  in  these  matters,  the  followers  of  Oro 
are  still  very  powerful  and  will  punish  the  divulging 
of  secrets  of  this  sort,  if  they  can). 

I would  draw  your  attention  to  page  65,  “ Great 
Benin,”  where  Mr.  C.  Punch  is  made  to  say,  “ With 
these  parts  of  the  slain  men  and  women  the  Oba 
is  said  to  have  made  certain  medicine  for  fetish 
purposes.” 

Although  I have  not  been  able  to  procure  a leather 
“bull-roarer”  it  is  well  to  remember  that  in  the 
first  version  Oro  is  made  to  say,  “ this  is  not  simply 
wood,”  and  in  the  second,  “ when  you  have  finished 

kuta  in  1830  to  this  day  it  is  a woman  that  “ Heralds  the  Oro  ” (Lo  Oro)  at 
the  annual  Oro  festival  which  takes  place  in  this  township  about  Easter 
time  each  year. 


in  DEATH,  BURIAL  AND  DEPARTED  SPIRITS  53 

with  the  piece  of  flesh”  and  “then  said  the  small 
piece  of  flesh.” 

Certain  parts  of  the  dead  Father  are  preserved 
by  the  Bakutu.  The  penis  is  cut  off  and  smoked 
and  then  worn  as  a charm  by  his  first  wife’s  eldest  son. 

“ Come  to  my  flesh  again,”  says  Oro,  and  he  cut 
a stick  and  tied  a string  to  it  and  left  it  in  the 
ground.  Then  Oro  departed  from  the  world,  being 
offended  because  a woman  had  seen  part  of  him. 

Another  reason  given  to  me  for  the  exclusion 
of  women  from  affairs  of  state  apart  from  their 
inability  to  keep  a secret,  was  that  wherever  a 
man  was,  a woman  came  from  here  and  another 
from  there  and  both  wished  to  become  his  friend 
(lover)  and  hence  quarrels  and  fights  ensued,  and 
that  men  had  formed  this  fraternity  of  “ Oro  ” out  of 
self-protection. 

The  following  uses  of  the  word  Oro  given  by 
Mr.  Adesola  in  The  Nigerian  Chronicle , September 
24,  1909,  appear  to  me  to  be  most  interesting  : — 

“ The  important  place  assigned  to  the  worship 
of  this  god  by  the  Egbas  and  other  Yoruba  tribes 
who  have  adopted  it,  the  strictest  privacy  with  which 
its  rites  and  ceremonies  are  observed  and  the  un- 
flinching severity  with  which  it  punishes  criminals 
give  rise  to  an  extended  use  of  the  term  Oro  to 
denote  (1)  anyigod,  especially  those  with  whose  worship 
private  rites  and  ceremonies  are  associated ; (2)  any 
secret  society  ; (3)  any  secret  rite  or  ceremony  ; (4)  any 
strong  or  wicked  man  ; (5)  any  very  severe  punishment ; 
(6)  any  unpleasant  and  habitual  characteristics  of  a man, 


54 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


(7)  an  expression  of  great  surprise.  The  following  are 
illustrative  sentences  of  the  above. 


(1)  Egungun  l’oro  ilu  wa 

ati  ti  idile  wa. 

(2)  Awon  ol’oro  li  eyi. 

(3)  A mi  s’oro  loni  No  III. 

(4)  Oro  nini 

Oko  yi  ti  m’oro. 

Oro  agbolu  aje. 


(5)  Kini  se  omode  ni  ti 

nke  ? Iya  re  nsoro 
fun  ni. 

Okonrin  na  mbo.  J owo 
re  ma  soro  fun  u. 

Wa  ki  nforo  han  o. 

(6)  Omode  na  puro  ju.  Oro 

re  ni  ati  ti  idile  won. 


(7)  Oro  o ! or  Oro  Baba  o ! 


Egungun  is  our  national  and  household 
god. 

These  are  the  members  of  a secret  or 
friendly  society. 

We  are  performing  the  rites  to-day.  No 

III. 

That’s  he,  a very  wicked  man  (lit.  He  is 
an  Oro  indeed). 

You  have  not  known  the  tyrant  (lit.  the 
Oro). 

A strong  man  that  can  dare  anything 
(the  expression  literally  is  : — Oro  that 
can  remove  from  the  arena  of  life  the 
chief  of  the  craft  of  witches.  Any 
woman  termed  the  head-witch  is 
always  supposed  to  be  inaccessible  to 
punishment  even  by  the  state ; the 
business  is  often  entrusted  to  the  Oro). 

Why  is  that  child  crying  ? The  mother 
is  giving  him  a severe  punishment 
(lit.  doing  Oro  for  him). 

The  man  is  approaching  you.  Leave  him. 
I’ll  teach  a lesson  (lit.  I’ll  make  the  Oro 
for  him). 

Come  near  and  let  me  teach  you  a 
lesson  (lit.  show  you  Oro). 

That  boy  tells  awful  lies.  It  is  charac- 
teristic of  him  and  his  people  (lit.  it  is 
the  Oro  worshipped  by  him,  &c.  A 
man’s  disposition  is  here  regarded  as 
the  moral  god  to  which  he  bows). 

“ By  Jove”  (lit.  Thou  Oro  of  my  father. 
This  cry  is  heard  all  about  the  streets 
from  men  and  boys  whenever  the  Oro 
gods  are  out  ; and  it  is  that  by  which 
the  spirit  is  invoked.  Although  the 
spirits  of  females  are  supposed  to  enter 
into  the  deified  state  yet  the  Oro  spirits 
of  males  alone  are  invoked  and 
worshipped.  Really  the  Oro  is  re- 
garded as  the  deified  spirits  of  males. 
This  is  so  because  men  only  take  part 
in  its  rites  and  ceremonies). 


iii  DEATH,  BURIAL  AND  DEPARTED  SPIRITS  55 

In  the  Burial  customs  in  the  Yoruba  country 
Mr.  Adesola  gives  a most  interesting  account  of  the 
annual  worship  of  “ Eluku  ” 1 the  Oro  of  the  Ijebu, 
to  which  I must  refer  you  if  you  wish  to  learn  all 
about  these  death  and  burial  customs.  For  the 
purpose  I have  in  view  I will  here  only  quote  a note 
of  his.  Eluku  is  described  as  the  God  Iraye  born, 
offspring  of  the  Royal  House  of  Oniloku.  “ Oniloku  ” 
is  the  title  of  the  monarch  of  Iraye,  an  ancient  royal 
town.  In  one  of  the  existing  Jebu  towns  a 
descendant  of  Oniloku  has  lately  been  installed 
into  that  office  in  the  Iraye  quarter  of  the  town. 

There  is  a similar  secret  society  in  Calabar  called 
Egbo  and  I have  been  informed  by  “ Harry  Hartze,” 
the  only  European  member,  that  it  appears  to  him 
to  be  a modified  and  simpler  form  of  Freemasonry. 
There  are  nine  degrees  and  the  cost  to  obtain  the 
right  to  wear  the  peacock’s  feather,  the  sign  of  the 
highest  grade,  is  about  £jo.  I could  not,  of  course, 
ask  this  famous  African  trader  to  tell  me  any  of  its 
secrets,  but  he  assured  me  there  was  nothing  phallic 
about  it. 

The  noise  made  by  the  Egbo  is  done  by  means 
of  a leaf  and  the  Egbo’s  mouth,  and  when  Egbo  thus 
announces  himself  women  and  non-Egbos  have  to 
keep  out  of  the  way.  The  Society  was  formed  for 
the  purpose  of  aiding  the  chiefs  to  keep  their  slaves 
in  order. 

But  the  Poro  Society,  so  ably  described  by 
Mr.  T.  J.  Alldridge  in  his  interesting  book,  “ The 

1 Nigerian  Chronicle , to  be  seen  at  the  Royal  Colonial  Institute. 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


56 

Sherbro  and  its  Hinterland,”  does  appear  to  be 
phallic,  and  a boy  has  no  real  name  until  he  goes 
to  the  Poro  bush,  when  it  is  given  to  him  at  his 
circumcision. 

The  dress  of  the  Poro  boys  is  very  like  that  of 
the  Nkimbi  in  the  Congo  (see  page  127);  it  also 
appears  to  be  a system  of  Freemasonry.  The 
meeting  for  initiation  takes  place  in  the  dry  season 
and  there  are  three  degrees.  But  when  Poro 
approaches  a town  he  does  not  wear  a distinctive 
dress.  Upon  the  news  of  his  coming  reaching 
the  town  all  men  who  are  not  of  the  Poro  order, 
together  with  all  women  and  children,  must  conceal 
themselves  inside  their  huts  and  drop  down  the 
mats  before  the  doors  and  window  spaces.  The 
women  are  to  kneel  down  indoors,  and  clap  their 
hands. 

The  heads  of  the  Poro  are  called  Tasso,  they 
wear  an  enormous  head-gear  like  the  Ovia  men 
of  the  Bini,  the  Eluku  of  the  Yoruba  towns  in 
the  Kukuruku  Country  (see  page  209,  At  the 
Back  of  the  Black  Mans  Mind),  the  Egungun  of 
Yoruba,  or  the  Mbundu  of  Kakong. 

If  a Tasso  dies  in  a town  he  must  not  be  interred 
there,  and  no  woman  must  look  upon  a dead  Tasso. 
But  a woman  can  become  a Deh-Boi  or  Poro 
woman. 

In  neither  of  these  two  foreign  secret  societies 
is  anything  of  their  origin  known,  but  they  rely 
on  the  superstitious  fears  of  the  people  for  their 
power. 


hi  DEATH,  BURIAL  AND  DEPARTED  SPIRITS  57 

I have  shown  that  the  Oro  is  certainly  a secret 
society  founded  on  the  fear,  so  inherent  in  the  native 
of  Africa,  of  the  actions  of  the  departed  spirits, 
and  we  have  learned  that  the  Ogboni  is  a kind  of 
Executive  Council  which  uses  “Oro”  as  a deterrent, 
much  in  the  same  way  as  the  Congo  people  and,  in 
some  parts  of  Yorubaland,  the  Yoruba  use  their 
fetishes. 

In  the  making  of  a fetish  (page  93,  At  the  Back 
of  the  Black  Man’s  Mind ) I have  described  how  one 
of  these  fetishes  is  made  ; the  Nganga,  with  a number 
of  people,  goes  into  the  bush  and  cuts  a Muamba 
tree  down,  and  calls  out  the  name  of  the  man  whose 
Kulu  or  spirit  shall  inhabit  the  fetish.  The  man 
whose  name  is  thus  called  out  dies,  and  it  is  the 
fear  of  the  harm  which  the  spirit  of  this  man  may  do 
that  causes  the  fetish  to  act  as  a deterrent. 

Westermarck  in  Chapter  XLV,  page  535,  of  his 
Origin  and  Development  of  the  Moral  Ideas , says  : 
“ The  Basutos  maintain  that  their  dead  ancestors 
are  continually  endeavouring  to  draw  them  to  them- 
selves and  therefore  attribute  to  them  every  disease, 
and  the  Tarahumares  in  Mexico  suppose  that  the 
dead  make  their  relatives  ill  from  a feeling  of  loneli- 
ness, that  they,  too,  may  die  and  join  the  departed. 
But  the  notion  that  the  disembodied  soul  is  on  the 
whole  a malicious  being  constantly  watching  for  an 
opportunity  to  do  harm  to  the  living  is  also,  no  doubt, 
intimately  connected  with  the  instinctive  fear  of 
the  dead,  which  is  in  its  turn  the  outcome  of  the  fear 
of  death.” 


58 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


The  Bavili  give  their  dead  the  most  imposing 
funeral  they  can,  and  they  bury  their  dead  in  places 
set  apart  for  the  purpose.  The  Yoruba,  however, 
always  buried  their  important  departed  in  their  houses 
and  set  apart  a day  in  every  year  to  do  them  honour. 

The  Yoruba  seem  also  to  connect  ideas  with  which 
they  have  surrounded  natural  phenomena  with 
personages  whose  characters  seemed  to  them  to  fit 
in  with  these  impressions,  and  then  on  the  death 
of  these  persons  to  have  deified  them  and  gradually 
to  have  looked  upon  them  as  the  cause  of  the  effects 
produced  by  these  natural  phenomena. 

Thus  the  darkness  before  dawn  they  looked  upon  as 
the  beginning  of  the  things  that  followed.  It  was 
harmful  to  them  because  they  could  not  see. 

Some  person  learned  in  Genesis  they  called  Odudua, 
and  on  his  death  this  person  was  deified,  and  as  an 
“Orisha”  became  the  Creator  out  of  whom  all  things 
were  made. 

Again,  their  history  tells  us  that  “Shango,”  their 
lightning  Orisha,  was  the  fourth  Alafin  of  Oyo  and 
explains  how  he  became  deified. 

But  I will  allow  the  native,  as  nearly  as  I can, 
to  continue  to  tell  his  own  story,  and  to  convince  you 
that  whatever  his  methods,  instinct  or  inspiration 
coupled  with  natural  observation  has  led  him  to  the 
foundation  of  a remarkably  interesting  mythology. 

To  conclude,  we  have  thus  far  noted  that  Egungun 
is  the  Father  come  from  heaven. 

That  Oro  was  the  Orisha  of  the  first  father. 

That  Eluku  was  the  offspring  of  the  Royal  house  of 


in  DEATH,  BURIAL  AND  DEPARTED  SPIRITS  59 

Oniloku.  And  on  the  death  of  Ogbola,  a famous 
hunter  near  Olokemeji,  I witnessed  the  women  coming, 
stamping  and  singing  Epa ! Oro  ! 1 Baba  lo  l’oni  o ! 
Baba  wa  l’amwa,  awa  kori  o!  Epa!  Oro!  We  are 
looking  for  our  Father!  and  we  do  not  see  him! 

H owever  much  then  the  stories  and  their  explan- 
ations may  differ,  enough  has  been  said  to  allow  us  to 
conclude  that  the  beatification  of  their  ancestors  is  a 
very  ancient  custom  of  the  Yoruba. 

With  this  fact  fixed  firmly  in  our  minds  we  can  now 
proceed  to  consider  their  more  developed  Social  and 
Religious  systems. 

1 May  not  Oro  be  a contracted  form  of  Ore-o  and  simply  mean  the  spirit 
of  the  departed  (father) — Adesola  writes  : Now  Oro  worship  is  undeniably 
spirit- worh ip.  Every  Oro  is  itself  supposed  to  be  the  Manes  of  a 
deceased  parent  or  ancestor  to  which  prayers  and  sacrifices  are  offered,  and 
invocations  made. 

[Note. — I should  like  to  remark  in  passing  that  West  African  secret 
societies  seem  to  fall  under  three  heads,  t.e.,  phallic,  medical,  and 
funerary.  To  the  second  class  belong  such  organisations  as  the  Leopard 
Society  described  by  Aldridge,  loc.  cit.,  the  object  of  which  is  to  obtain 
human  kidney  fat  with  which  to  make  powerful  medicine.  These 
societies  have  only  by  degrees  and  at  a later  stage  acquired  political 
powers.] 


CHAPTER  IV 

THE  FOUR  GREAT  ESTATES  IN  THE  NATIVE  FORM  OF 
GOVERNMENT 

The  death  of  the  founder  of  the  family,  presumably 
the  grandfather,  caused  a great  impression  on  the 
father,  mother  and  son  who  were  left,  and  I think  I 
have  said  enough  to  show  that  the  Yoruba  reveres  and 
beatifies  his  dead.  The  family  that  once  was 
composed  of  three,  i.e.  father,  mother  and  son,  now 
became  one  of  four,  i.e.  the  Orisha  (the  departed  father), 
and  the  father,  mother  and  son.  The  father  fished,  the 
mother  gathered  vegetables,  and  the  son  hunted.  It 
was  the  duty  of  each  one  of  this  little  family  to  see 
that  the  Orisha  was  fed.  In  this  way  perhaps 
commenced  the  Yoruba  first  division  of  time  into 
weeks  of  four  days,  the  Orisha’s  day,  the  father’s  day, 
the  mother’s  day,  the  son’s  day,  and  it  was  probably 
rather  owing  to  the  necessity  of  supplying  the  needs 
of  the  Orisha  than  their  own  humble  wants  that  the 
necessity  to  exchange  products  first  arose,  hence  the 
Orisha’s  day  became  the  market  day. 

As  the  family  became  more  numerous  and  developed 
into  village  life  we  find  that  the  woman  has  fallen  out 

60 


CH.  IV 


THE  FOUR  GREAT  ESTATES 


of  what  one  looks  upon  as  her  place  and  that  her  room 
has  been  filled  by  her  brother  in  the  family  council. 
The  head  of  the  village  now  worships  the  village 
Orisha  through  the  spirit  of  his  dead  father  for  his 
people,  and  is  helped  in  regulating  village  affairs  by 
the  counsel  of  his  wife’s  brother  and  his  son. 

Later  on  in  Town  life  we  find  a further  develop- 
ment, i.e.  a kind  of  quadruple  control  composed  of 
the  dowager  Queen  mother  or  Iyalode  and  her  Court, 
the  Oba,  and  his  Court,  the  Balogun  and  his  Court, 
and  the  Bashorun  and  his  Court. 

(1)  The  dowager  Queen’s  Court  is  now  composed 
of : — 

( a ) Three  women  named  respectively  Oton 
who  proposes  where  meetings  shall  be  held, 
Osi  who  goes  round  gathering  information  which 
she  reports  to  the  Iyalode,  and  lastly  Ashipa  who 
collects  money  and  distributes  it. 

(b)  A Bale  who  acts  as  Iyalode’s  interpreter 
with  Bada  the  chief  of  her  messengers. 

(c)  Small  boys  called  Amade. 

(2)  On  the  other  hand  we  have  the  Oba  attended 
by  three  courtiers  jointly  called  Igbi  but  respectively 
Oton,  Osi,  who  hold  up  his  right  and  left  arms,  and 
Jaguna  the  captain  of  his  bodyguard  and  executioner. 
As  these  three  are  always  near  him  they  wield  (or  did 
so)  very  great  power. 

Barbot,  in  his  “ Coast  of  Guinea,”  book  3,  chapter  27, 
page  290,  mentions  the  names  of  three  men  as  great 
Chiefs  of  the  Court  of  the  King  of  Fetu.  (1)  Dy,  a 


62 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


high  treasurer,  (2)  Brasso  or  standard  bearer,  and 
(3)  the  Fataira.  On  page  479  he  says,  “ The  Jagos 
have  three  governors,  Singe,  Kobak  and  Kabango.” 

In  Benin  city  the  Oba  had  three  great  ones, 
Onegwa,  Offade  and  Arribon,  whose  titles  appear  to 
have  been  (1)  Osuma,  messenger  connected  with  the 
King’s  wants  (2)  Esogban,  messenger  connected 
with  King’s  gifts  and  (3)  Esawn,  the  King’s  captain. 

(3)  The  next  great  officer  of  state  is  the  Balogun  or 
war  chief  whose  Court  in  Abeokuta  is  composed  of 
Seriki,  Bada,  and  Ashipa  and  their  attendants. 

(4)  Then  comes  the  Bashorun  (the  Iayse  of  the 
Bini)  who  is  head  of  the  Council  and  is  attended  by 
the  three  officers  of  the  Council  called  the  Ogboni, 
about  which  something  has  already  been  said  and  of 
which  much  more  will  be  written. 

Thus  out  of  the  simple  government  by  the  Grand- 
father (who  became  the  Orisha)  and  father,  mother, 
son,  we  have  arrived  at  the  development  of  a govern- 
ment by  four  great  chiefs,  each  the  head  of  a court 
of  three  and  their  followers. 

(1)  The  Iyalode  the  relict  of  the  grandfather. 

(2)  The  Oba  the  father  representing  Fatherhood. 

(3)  The  Balogun  representing  the  brother  of  the 
mother  or  Motherhood. 

(4)  The  Bashorun  representing  Sonship. 

Nefftzer  has  called  the  Roman  Gods  the  super- 
natural magistrates  of  the  republic.  We  shall,  I hope, 
be  able  to  show  that  these  four  great  chiefs  have  also 
their  counterpart  in  heaven. 

It  is  interesting  and  very  important  to  note  that 


IV 


THE  FOUR  GREAT  ESTATES 


63 

these  four  great  ones  fall  into  their  places  as  pairs, 
Iyalode  and  Balogun,  the  female  duality,  and  the  Oba 
and  the  Bashorun  or  the  male  duality. 

Bishop  Johnson  has  said  or  written  that  so  far  as 
his  studies  go  he  can  only  find  duality  among  the  (so- 
called)  heathen  Gods.  Now  while  the  Dualities  are 
plain  enough,  the  puzzle  is  to  find  the  Trinity. 

May  I offer  the  following  as  the  solution. 

Iyalode  represents  the  mother  in  the  past,  the 
Balogun  as  the  brother  represents  the  wife  of  the 
King,  the  mother  of  the  son. 

The  Oba  equals  the  Father. 

The  Bashorun  the  Son. 

In  heaven  the  Orishas, 

(1)  Odudua  represents  the  Creator  in  heaven  or  the 
Iyalode  on  earth. 

(2)  Obatala  the  Balogun,  the  mother’s  brother  or 
Motherhood. 

(3)  Jakuta  Fatherhood,  and 

(4)  I fa  the  Sonship. 

Among  the  Bini  the  days  of  the  week  are  said  to  be 
(1)  the  Regent’s  or  lyase’s  day,  (2)  Osuma’s  day,  (3) 
Esogban’s  day  and  (4)  Esawn’s  day.  Among  the 
Yoruba  they  are  not  only  connected  with  the  Oba  and 
the  three  great  chiefs  but  they  are  called  Odudua’s 
day,  Jakuta’s  day,  Obatala’s  day  and  I fa’s  day. 

Thus  the  Orisha’s  (or  market)  day  is  now  known  as 
Odudua’s  or  Iyalode’s  day,  the  father’s  day  has  become 
Jakuta’s  day,  the  mother’s  day  has  become  Obatala’s 
day,  and  the  son’s  day  has  become  Ifa’s  day.  Thus 
altogether  there  are  two  dualities,  a female  and  a male. 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CH.  IV 


64 


One  person  of  the  female  duality  belongs  to  the  past 
and  the  Trinity  is  represented  by  the  father,  mother, 
son,  Jakuta,  Obatala  and  I fa  or  the  Oba,  the  Balogun 
and  the  Bashorun. 

I will  now  proceed  to  say  something  more  of  these 
great  Orishas  whose  names  are  now  known  to  us. 


CHAPTER  V 


JAKUTA.  THE  FOUR  WINDS 

Jakuta 

The  Yoruba  have  confused  Jakuta  with  Shango  until 
they  are  to-day  almost  identical,  but  there  is  in  reality 
a difference  between  Jakuta  the  great  “procreator” 
and  Shango,  the  son  of  Yemoja,  the  so-called  god  of 
lightning  and  the  great  marriage  deity. 

Jakuta  maybe  said  to  be  Shango  in  a former  period, 
and  Shango  is  to-day  worshipped  on  the  day  called 
Jakuta. 

Jakuta  as  the  thrower  of  stones,  so  closely  connected 
with  Odudua  who  may  be  said  to  represent  chaos,  is 
rather  the  thunderbolt  than  the  lightning,  and  was 
looked  upon  as  the  great  father  in  heaven. 

He  is  likened  at  times  to  the  east  wind,  the  cause 
of  the  coming  of  the  thunderstorm  with  its  clouds, 
rain,  and  wind  connected  with  the  first  tornado  season. 
At  this  time  the  ancient  Yoruba’s  (father’s  and  son’s) 
thoughts  turned  to  marriage,  and  no  doubt  in  the 
fights  that  took  place  stones  were  the  weapons  that 
they  used.  And  now  a stone  fell  from  heaven.  Ah  ! 

65 


F 


66 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


thought  the  stone  throwers,  the  dead  father  in  heaven 
is  also  at  war  and  throwing  stones,  and  so  perhaps 
came  the  name  Ija  strife,  Oko  stone,  Ta1  to  produce, 
shortened  into  Jakuta.  The  verb  Ja  is  to  fight,  and 
okuta  is  a stone.2 

I remember  travelling  behind  Chilunga,  now  in 
Congo  Frangais,  and  coming  across  a large  stone  near 
to  the  top  of  a hill  which  had  marks  on  it.  These  my 
companion  Tate  told  me  were  the  foot-prints  of  God 
(Nzambi). 

At  Adenyoba  on  the  Osse  River,  or  rather  in  the 
bush  not  far  from  there,  a large  stone  is  venerated  in 
the  same  way  by  the  Bini. 

1 Also  to  throw. 

2 The  verb  Ko  is  to  grow  hard. 

Oko  is  a stone,3  also  a farm. 

Oko  bo  is  a eunuch. 

Oko  the  foreskin. 

Oko  a husband. 

Oko  a hoe. 

Oko  a spear. 

Ako  beginning. 

Ako  a male. 

Ako  obiri  a strumpet. 

Iko  where  the  pillar  is  and  where  they  meet,  comes  to  mean 
a meeting. 

The  verb  Lo  is  to  engraft. 

Lu  is  to  bore. 

Olo  is  a millstone. 

Olu  is  a hammer. 

Solu  is  to  copulate. 

The  verb  Le  is  to  engraft. 

Ole  is  embryo. 

lie  means  land,  a town. 

Ilu  a nation. 


3  Oko,  a farm,  is  pronounced  in  the  same  way  as  oko,  a stone,  with 
change  of  intonation,  but  oko,  a husband  is  pronounced  awkaw,  in  the 
same  way  as  oko,  or  awkaw,  a hoe. 


V JAKUTA.  THE  FOUR  WINDS  67 

Monsieur  P.  Saintyves  in  his  book  Les  Vierges 
Meres  et  les  N aissances  Miraculeuses  has  given  us  a 
long  account  of  fecund  stones,  so  that  we  know  the 
Yoruba  is  by  no  means  alone  in  his  veneration  of 
sacred  stones. 

If  Togun  had  not  remarked  that  Ajaguno  was  a 
woman,  I should  be  inclined  to  say  that  Jakuta  and 
Ajaguno  were  one  and  the  same  person,  and  that 
Jakuta  was  the  power  that  did  the  fighting  for  the 
greater  gods,  as  his  name  is  always  coupled  with 
theirs  as  in  the  names  of  the  four  days  of  the 
week. 

But  it  must  be  remembered  that  Jakuta  really 
represents  the  Spirit  of  the  departed  Father,  the 
stone-thrower  who  has  gone  to  heaven  and  who  rules 
through  his  son  on  earth. 

At  the  time  when  Jakuta  was  worshipped  as  the 
dead  father  in  heaven  the  Yoruba  had  not  yet 
developed  the  ideas  now  connected  with  Olorun  (the 
owner  of  heaven). 

These  ideas  must  have  come  to  them  when,  or 
rather  some  time  after,  they  had  come  to  dwell  in 
towns.  It  seems  that  Jakuta  is  the  first  step  in  the 
development  of  the  Yoruba  idea  of  God.  Jakuta  (or 
rather  now  they  say  Shango)  is  said  to  have  been  a 
King  or  Alafin  of  Oyo,  the  typical  and  temporal  head 
of  the  Yoruba  race.  (See  Yortiba- speaking  Peoples , 
page  50). 

It  is  most  interesting  to  read  in  a description  of 
South  Guinea  by  Barbot  (page  306),  in  writing  of  the 
natives  of  the  Gold  Coast  : “ When  it  thunders  they 


f 2 


68 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


say  it  is  the  voice  of  the  trumpets,  or  blowing-horns  of 
Jan  Goeman,  so  they  call  God,  who,  with  reverence 
be  it  spoken,  is  diverting  himself  with  his  wives  ; and, 
therefore,  when  it  thunders  much,  or  though  there  be 
only  flashes  of  lightning,  they  presently  run  under 
cover  if  possible,  believing  that  if  they  did  not  so  God 
would  strike  them  with  his  thunderbolts. 

“About  the  year  1480,  the  Spaniards  trading  at  the 
coast  found  those  blacks  extremely  covetous  and  fond 
of  a sort  of  seashell,  giving  anything  they  had  for 
them,  as  believing  they  had  a peculiar  virtue  against 
thunder.  Whereupon  so  many  of  those  shells  were 
carried  out  of  Spain  that  at  last  they  were  scarce  to  be 
had  there  for  money.” 

Bosman,  writing  about  thunderstorms,  says  : “The 
stake  which  supported  our  Flag  was  shattered  int 
splinters  from  top  to  bottom,  and  yet  remained  stand- 
ing, but  so  torn  asunder  as  if  one  or  two  hundred 
chisels  had  been  driven  into  it  in  order  to  split  it. 
The  negroes,  in  the  same  terrified  condition,  with  us 
being  of  opinion  that  the  force  of  the  thunder  is  con- 
tained in  a certain  stone , after  the  storm  was  over 
brought  one,  which  they  ridiculously  believed  had  so 
shattered  our  Flag  pole.  But  no  wonder  they  were 
of  that  opinion,  for  in  Europe,  where  we  think  we  are 
better  informed,  several  people  don’t  much  differ  from 
them.”  Then  he  goes  on  to  say,  “ But  what  I have 
observed  of  the  effects  of  thunder  is  sufficient  to 
convince  me  that  ’tis  impossible  they  should  be 
caused  by  a stone.”  All  I have  to  say  to  this  is 
“ Jakuta ! ” 


V 


JAKUTA.  THE  FOUR  WINDS 


69 


The  Four  Winds 

The  East  in  Yoruba  is  known  by  the  name  of  Ila 
Orun,  i.e.  the  place  where  “he  that  arises  appears.” 

Ila  also  means  the  act  of  splitting,  possibly  the  idea 
comes  from  the  fact  that  here  darkness  and  light 
become  divided.  This  idea  of  splitting  brings  their 
thoughts  to  creation,  written  Ida,  and  this  word  again 
can  be  traced  to  the  verb  Da  to  be  and  to  make  or 
Ta  to  produce,  as  yams  are  produced  by  splitting  up 
the  seed  yam. 

This  meaning  coincides  with  the  Bavili  word  (see 
chapter  Obatala,  page  82)  Xivanga  or  Creator,  Va 
meaning  to  split. 

Ila  also  means  Salvation,  and  we  know  that  both 
the  Yoruba  and  the  Bavili  say  that  their  religion  came 
from  the  East. 

The  West  is  Iha  Igun  aiye  ibuwo,  the  corner 
region  of  the  earth  (where  the  Sun  lodges).  It  is 
interesting  to  note  while  talking  of  the  West  that  it  is 
to  the  South-West  of  Ife,  the  supposed  centre  of  the 
Yoruba  Kingdom,  near  the  beach  or  where  the  Sun 
sets,  that  we  find  the  I fa  sacred  palm  tree  in  large 
quantities,  said  to  have  been  first  found  in  Orungan’s 
farm  or  where  he  lodged.  Orungan  is  another  name 
for  Orun  the  Sun,  that  is  the  heat  of  the  Sun  at  mid- 
day. 

The  North  is  known  as  Ari  Wa  Otun  Ila  Orun, 
one  who  finds  and  comes  to  the  right  of  the 
East. 

The  South,  or  Igun  kerin  aiye,  is  the  fourth  corner 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


70 


of  the  world.  It  is  evident  then  that  the  Yoruba  idea 
of  their  world  was  that  it  was  square  and  that  the  sun 
travelled  from  the  Eastern  corner  to  the  Western 
corner.  Their  proverb,  “ Igun  Merin  ni  Aiye  Ini,” 
says,  “ The  world  has  or  is  supported  by  four  corners.” 
This  probably  explains  the  figure  marked  in  chalk  on 
the  ground  in  front  of  the  altar  to  the  Orisha  Olokun 
(the  sea  spirit)  noticed  by  me  at  Igo  near  Benin  city 
(see  chapter  XXI,  page  225,  At  the  Back  of  the 


Black  Man's  Mind). 


The  mark  is 


The  native 


places  his  back  to  the  East  and  looks  westward  and  so 
has  the  North  on  his  right.  The  Yoruba  also  have  a 
figure  called  Olori  merin  which  has  four  heads,  which 
is  generally  found  placed  upon  a mound  near  the 
centre  of  the  town  so  that  each  head  faces  one  of  the 
four  great  points  of  the  compass.  Four  times  every 
year  a new-born  infant  four  days  old  used  to  be 
sacrificed  to  this  power  in  the  presence  of  its  mother. 
Colonel  Ellis  calls  this  sacrifice  Ejeodun,  the  season  of 
blood,  and  tells  us  that  while  Olori  merin  protected 
the  town  and  watched  the  four  points  of  the  compass 
from  his  mound  it  was  believed  that  no  war  or 
pestilence  could  attack  it.  Now  a force  of  men 
attacking  a town  would  come  by  the  roads  and  try  to 
enter  the  city  by  one  or  all  of  the  four  gates,  but 
sickness  and  pestilence,  the  Yoruba  say,  are  brought 
by  the  winds. 

This  dual  attack  may  be  described  as  a personal 
and  physical  invasion,  and  as  the  gates  are  in  the 
centre  of  each  wall  while  the  points  of  the  compass  are 


V JAKUTA.  THE  FOUR  WINDS  71 

the  four  corners  of  the  walled  town,  the  following 
figure  may  be  said  to  represent  these  ideas.  The  only 


\ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

\ 

\ 

one  of  the  four  great  Orishas  connected  with  the 
winds  is  Jakuta,  translated  roughly  as  the  Hurler  of 
Stones,  the  Yoruba  Jupiter.  He  comes  with  the  East 
wind  that  brings  tornados.  It  would  seem  to  follow 
that  the  four  Orishas,  Jakuta,  Obatala,  Odudua  and 
Ifa  should  represent  the  East,  North,  South  and 
West  winds. 

I have  been  informed  by  Babalawo  Oliyitan  that 
the  figure  Olori  Merin  is  not  in  itself  an  Orisha  but 
merely  a Juju  representing  the  above  four  great 
Orishas,  and  as  it  has  been  stated  that  this  figure  faces 
the  four  points  of  the  compass  and  guards  the  city 
from  pestilence  and  war  we  can  assume  the  position  of 
each  Orisha. 

Looking  towards  the  West  Obatala  will  point  to  the 
North,  Odudua  to  the  South,  Jakuta  to  the  East  and 
Ifa  to  the  West. 

The  Yoruba  calls  the  winds  that  bring  disease 
Afefe  Buruku,1  Buruku  being  another  name  for 
Shankpana,  the  small-pox  “ god,”  who  is  said  to  be  a 
son  of  “ Yemoja.” 

But  on  the  other  hand  Oliyitan  tells  me  that  a 
whirlwind,  which  he  called  Aja,  carries  people  off  to 
the  bush,  and,  keeping  them  there  two  or  three  months, 

1 Afefe  buruku  means  bad  or  ill  wind. 


72 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CH.  V 


teaches  them  the  use  of  medicinal  herbs  by  which 
diseases  are  cured. 

Olorun  (Awlawrun)  is  the  word  now  used  for  God. 
Olu  means  owner,  Orun  heaven  or  sky.  Jakuta,  we 
have  noted,  is  the  Father  God,  the  stone-thrower 
connected  with  the  wind  that  blows  the  mysteries  of 
the  East  to  the  centre  of  the  Kingdom  or  the  walled 
city.  The  Sun  (Orun)  rises  in  the  East ; it  is  possible 
therefore  that  the  wind  and  storm  god  as  a spiritual 
revealer  is  nearly  related  to  the  Sun  as  the  physical 
revealer,  and  I think  we  can  understand,  as  religious 
ideas  developed,  how  Olorun  took  the  place  of  Jakuta 
as  the  heavenly  Father  God  and  how  Jakuta  under 
the  name  of  Shango  became  a mere  marriage  Orisha. 


CHAPTER  VI 

ODUDUA  AND  THE  FOUR  DAYS  OF  THE  WEEK 

Togun  said  Orishala  was  the  husband  of  Yemuhu,  but 
Ellis  tells  us  that  Obatala  was  the  husband  of 
Oduduwa.  Are  we  then  to  suppose  that  Yemuhu  and 
Oduduwa  are  two  names  for  one  person,  or  that 
Orishala  had  two  wives  ? I am  inclined  to  believe 
that  Oduduwa  and  Yemuhu1  are  two  names  for  one 
person.  Bishop  Crowther  also  gives  this  deity  the 
name  of  Odua.  Bishop  Johnson  talking  of  the  Odus2 
in  Yoruba  heathenism  says,  “ Behind  each  one  of 
these  representative  nuts  are  sixteen  subordinate 
divinities.  Each  one  of  the  whole  lot  is  termed  an 
Odu,  which  means  a chief,  ahead.”  Bishop  Crowther 
gives  the  word  Olu  as  the  chief  of  anything. 

Oduwa  and  Oluwa  then  mean  the  same  thing, 
i.e.  “ Owner,”  which  in  the  form  of  Olowa  Ini  or 
Oloni  is  now  another  name  for  God.  Bishop 
Crowther  also  says  Odua  or  Odudua  is  a goddess 
from  Ife,  said  to  be  the  supreme  goddess  in  the 
world.  Heaven  and  earth  are  also  called  Odudua — 

1 Ye  means  “ Mother,"  and  Muhu  is  to  cause  to  be,  to  cause  to 
germinate. 

2 Ifa’s  sacred  palm  nuts. 


73 


74 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


“ Odudua  Igbd  nla  meji  ade  isi.  Heaven  and  earth 
are  two  large  calabashes  which  being  shut  can 
never  be  opened.”  And  Ellis  says  Obatala  and 
Odudua,  or  Heaven  and  earth,  resemble,  according  to 
the  priests,  two  large  calabashes  which  when  once  shut 
can  never  be  opened.  ...  He  goes  on  to  say,  accord- 
ing to  a myth  Odudua  is  blind.  In  the  beginning  of 
the  world  she  and  her  husband  were  shut  up  in 
darkness1  in  a large  closed  calabash,  Obatala  being 
in  the  upper  part  and  Odudua  in  the  lower.  . . . 
Odudua  complained  to  her  husband  of  the  confine- 
ment. ...  In  a frenzy  Obatala  tore  out  her  eyes.  . . . 
She  cursed  him  and  said,  “ Naught  shalt  thou  eat  but 
snails.”  It  will  be  remembered  that  Yemuhu’s  snails 
became  the  sixteen  heads  of  Eleda,  or,  in  other  words, 
the  sixteen  Orishas  taking  part  in  the  creation  of  the 
world.  The  calabash  or  gourd  in  which  Odudua  was 
confined  is  called  Igba.  The  words  for  ancestor  are 
“ Obi  Ara  Igbani,  the  parent  body  in  the  time  past,” 
and  in  this  sense  it  is  interesting  to  read  in  the 
Nigerian  Chronicle  an  article  on  the  history  of  the 
Yoruba  by  one  signing  himself  F.  S. 

“ At  the  head  of  immigrants  who  settled  in 
Yorubaland  about  the  eleventh  or  twelfth  century 
of  the  Christian  Era  was  Odudua  from  whom  most 
of  the  present  day  native  rulers  are  descended. 
Odudua,  however,  was  not  the  real  name  of  the 
leader  of  the  Bornu  immigrants.  His  name,  together 

1 The  verb  Du  is  to  be  black.  Dudu  means  black.  Odudua  is  the 
goddess  in  darkness  and  blind  opposed  in  a sense  to  Obatala  who  loves 
that  which  is  white,  clear  and  light. 


VI 


THE  FOUR  DAYS  OF  THE  WEEK 


75 


with  those  of  his  wives  and  children  and  companions 
are  entirely  lost,  and  his  descendants  many  ages 
after  his  death  designated  him  Odudua,  i.e.  Odu 
ti  o da  wa,  which  means  a “ self-existing  person- 
age.” He  is  also  called  Adumila  (“  Saviour  ”). 
His  wife,  from  whom  are  descended  the  dynasties  of 
the  leading  Yoruba  kingdoms,  was  designated 
Omonide,  i.e.  Omo  ni  ide,  which  means  a “ child  is 
brass,’”  brass  being  the  most  precious  metal  known 
to  the  early  Yoruba  people.  Omonide  is  also  called 
Iyamode,  a contraction  of  Iya  Omonide  “ Mother 
Omonide.” 

Odudua  is  worshipped  in  every  Yoruba  town, 
and  every  Yoruba  man,  woman  or  child  is  called 
Omo  Odudua  (“child  of  Odudua”). 

Many  years  after  the  death  of  Odudua  a Hausa 
Mussulman  came  to  Ife.  He  used  to  call  the 
inhabitants  together  and  read  to  them  passages  from 
the  copy  of  the  Koran  which  he  brought  with  him  from 
his  country.  He  was  wont  to  say  to  the  people  in 
Yoruba  imperfectly  as  he  could  speak  it  with  accents 
foreign  to  the  language — E wa  e je  ki  a sin  Allah , 
On  ni  o da  oke,  On  ni  o da  ile , On  ni  o da  gbogbo 
nkan,  On  ni  o da  wa  (“  Let  us  worship  Allah,  He 
created  the  Mountain,  He  created  the  lowland,  He 
created  everything,  He  created  us”).  He  did  this 
from  time  to  time  without  being  able  to  gain  a single 
proselyte,  and  died  a few  months  after  his  arrival 
in  Ife.  After  his  death  his  Koran  was  found 
hanging  on  a peg  on  the  wall  where  he  had  left 
it  in  a bag.  Some  of  the  men  who  saw  it  said 
Hausa  ti  o ku  ni  so  fun  wa  pe  Odu  ti  o da  iwa  ma  ma 
ni  eyi  o,  eyi  ni  Odudua , e je  ki  a ma  bo  o.  (“The 
late  Hausaman  told  us  this  was  the  personage  who 


76 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


created  existence,1  this  is  Odudua,  let  us  therefore 
worship  him  ”),  misunderstanding  the  Mussulman. 
So  they  removed  the  bag  containing  the  Koran 
from  the  peg  on  the  wall,  put  it  on  the  ground, 
covered  it  with  a pot  and  began  to  worship  it.  So 
commenced  the  worship  of  Odudua. 

Odudua  had  by  Omonide,  his  first  wife,  several 
children  ; his  eldest  daughter  was  the  mother  of 
the  founder  of  Owu,  who  become  king  of  Owu, 
and  was  consequently  styled  Olowu.  All  the 
children  of  Omonide  were  famous,  and  became 
founders  of  several  towns  in  the  Yoruba  Country. 
The  names  of  Omonide’s  children  or  of  any  of  the 
children  of  Odudua  are  practically  lost.  Omonide’s 
eldest  son  founded  Ketu  and  became  the  Alaketu 
or  king  of  Ketu.  Another  founded  Benin  (Ibini) 
and  became  the  Onibini.  Another  founded  Ila 
(Igbomina)  and  became  the  Onila.  Another  founded 
Sabe  and  became  the  Onisabe.  The  youngest 
of  Omonide’s  children  founded  a town,  the  habitable 
portion  of  which  was  so  small  that  it  was  called 
Kogbaye  (“  It  does  not  afford  room  ”),  of  which 
he  became  king.  Owing  to  the  smallness  of  this 
town  the  inhabitants  left  it  stealthily,  hence  it  was 
said  that  they  slipped  off  the  place.  They  went  to 
a locality  not  very  distant  from  Kogbaye  and  settled 
there.  Their  king  also  went  and  remained  with 
them.  From  the  circumstance  of  the  people  slipping 
off  (yo  lo ) from  Kogbaye  the  new  settlement  was 
called  Oyo  (“slipper”).  The  youngest  son  of 
Mother  Omonide  thus  became  the  Oloyo. 

Odudua  himself  died  in  Ife,  and  one  of  his  children 

1 Odudua  is  by  some  regarded  as  a contraction  of  Odu  ti  o da  iwa  (“  the 
personage  who  created  existence.”) 


VI 


THE  FOUR  DAYS  OF  THE  WEEK 


77 


by  his  other  wives  was  given  a broom  wherewith 
to  keep  his  grave  clean.  This  child  was  made  the 
Oni  or  king  of  Ife. 

The  Alaketu,  the  eldest  son  of  Odudua,  was  the 
first  of  his  sons  to  take  a wife.  His  wife  soon  had 
a babe  and  Mother  Omonide,  who  had  hitherto 
remained  at  Ife,  came  to  help  her  son’s  wife  in 
nursing  the  babe.  This  babe  afterwards  founded  Ake 
and  became  the  Alake.  Mother  Omonide  loved  her 
grandson  very  much  and  came  with  him  to  Ake, 
where  she  died.” 

We  shall  have  a good  deal  to  say  about  these 
sons  of  the  founder  of  the  Yoruba  Kingdom.  It 
will  be  noted  that  F.  S.  calls  Odudua  a male,  whereas 
Ellis,  Oja,  Togun,  and  Crowther  speak  of  her  as  a 
female. 

Upon  asking  people  the  question,  who  first  gave 
the  days  of  the  week  their  names  ? I have  always 
been  told  that  Odudua  inspired  them.  The  names  of 
the  days  of  the  week  were  first  given  to  me  by  Oja 
in  the  following  order  : — 

Eshu. 

Orishala. 

Odudua. 

Jakuta. 

This  was  at  Ilobi,  South-west  of  Egbaland.  An 
old  lady  called  Tinnawe  living  near  Olokemeji  gave 
me  the  days  in  the  following  order  which  she  said 
had  been  inspired  by  Odudua  : — 


78 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


A wo.  I fa’s  day. 

Ogun. 

Jakuta. 

Obatala. 

Oliyitan  1 gave  the  days  and  names  as  follows  : — 

Awo. 

Ogun. 

Jakuta. 

Orishala. 

Ellis  gives  the  first  day  as  a day  of  rest,  but 
gives  no  name  for  it,  and  then  the  following. 

Awo  or  Awu. 

Ogun. 

Shango,  another  name  for  Jakuta. 

Obatala. 

The  differences  apparent  in  the  above  list  are  (i) 
Eshu  for  Awo.  Awo  is  the  day  set  apart  by  the 
priests  of  I fa  to  renew  the  chalk  marks  made  on  the 
earth  in  front  of  the  altars  of  the  Orisha.  As  Eshu 
the  devil  shares  all  the  sacrifices  made  to  I fa,  it  is 
called  Ifa’s  day — Eshu’s  day,  or  the  day  of  Awo  or 
mystery. 

Shango  worship  has  taken  the  place  of  the  worship 
of  Jakuta  in  some  places,  but  Shango  has  been 
described  to  me  as  the  servant  or  son  of  Jakuta  who 
attends  to  the  lightning.  Again  Shango  is  a son  of 
“Yemoja”  who  is  the  daughter  of  Obatala. 


1 A priest  of  I fa. 


VI 


THE  FOUR  DAYS  OF  THE  WEEK 


79 


Ogun  is  a son  of  Yemoja  and  has  become  a very- 
important  power  as  the  “ god  ” of  iron  and  patron  of 
hunters.  Here  we  have  a minor  power,  as  a part, 
usurping  the  place  of  Odudua  as  the  earth  goddess 
who  was  the  first  protector  of  hunters,  much  in  the 
same  way  as  Shango  has  taken  Jakuta’s  place. 

Orishala  and  Obatala  are  one  and  the  same. 

An  Ibadan  named  Moredaio  gave  me  the  days  in 
the  same  order,  so  that  I think  we  are  justified  in 
looking  upon  Oja’s  order  as  wrong,  but  in  this 
case  Odudua  has  her  right  place,  i.e.  that  of  Ogun  in 
the  other  lists. 

Another  reason  for  Ogun  taking  Odudua’s  day  may 
be  that  very  often  Obatala  and  Odudua  are  spoken 
of  as  if  they  are  one.  As  Ellis  put  it,  “ according  to 
some  priests  Obatala  and  Odudua  represent  one 
androgynous  divinity,  and  they  say  an  image,  which  is 
sufficiently  common,  of  a human  being  with  one  arm 
and  one  leg,  and  a tail  terminating  in  a sphere, 
symbolises  this.”  This  being  so,  the  part  of  the 
earth  Ogun  may  have  come  to  take  Odudua’s 
place. 

The  four  days  of  the  Yoruba  week,  then,  are: 
Jakutas  day  which  is  looked  upon  as  a Sunday.  On 
this  day  they  clean  their  houses,  and  rub  their  floors. 
Then  they  “split”  Kola  for  the  Orishas  Shango, 
Yemoja,  Oshun  and  Buruku. 

Obatala  s day , sometimes  called  Orishala.  On  this 
day  they  rub  the  walls  and  floor  of  the  houses,  and 
fill  a pot  of  water  on  the  altar ; and  when  they  eat 
they  give  part  of  their  food  to  him.  The  following 


8o 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CH.  VI 


“ white  ” Orishas  are  worshipped  on  this  day  : — Larun. 
Ijaiyi,  Iluofun,  Ijemdori,  Ogiyan,  Alajugun,  Owa 
Olufon.  These  white  Orishas  are  appealed  to  by 
barren  women,  and  they  must  not  be  offered  palm  oil 
or  pepper. 

Awo,  or  Ifas  day.  The  people  cannot  consult  Ifa 
except  through  a priest.  In  this  way  he  is  consulted 
about  everything.  On  this  day  the  Ifa  priests  re- 
new the  chalk  marks  on  the  ground  in  front  of  the 
altars. 

Oshun  and  Odu  are  also  consulted  on  this  day. 
I have  more  to  say  about  Ifa  later  on. 

Odudud s or  Oguris  day.  When  they  build,  or  clear 
a farm,  or  cut  a tree,  or  hunt  they  split  kola  to  Ogun. 
Ija  and  Oshowsi  are  also  worshipped  on  this  day. 
Odudua  representing  the  creation,  it  is  quite  natural 
that  they  should  consider  her  day  as  first  in  their  week. 
The  first,  the  fifth,  the  ninth  and  seventeenth,  which 
they  look  upon  as  the  beginning  of  a new  month,  are 
sacred  to  Odudua,  and  are  all  market  days. 

In  Benin  city  there  are  four  markets,  one  of  which 
is  called  the  “Queen  Mother’s  market,”  and  this,  as 
we  have  already  seen,  is  the  position  of  Odudua. 


CHAPTER  VII 


OBATALA 

Four  Gates 

The  literal  meaning  of  the  words  Obaba  Arugbo, 
the  other  name  by  which  Togun  told  me  Orishala 
is  called,  is  Father  Greybeard. 

Orishala,  Bishop  Crowther  says,  is  another  name 
for  Obatala,  whom  he  calls  the  Great  Goddess  (?)  1 
of  the  Yoruba,  the  framer  of  the  human  body  in  the 
womb.  But  Togun  called  Orishala  the  man,  the 
husband  of  Yemuhu. 

The  word  is  evidently  formed  of  the  words  Orisha 
and  nla. 

Ellis  says  the  word  Orisha  seems  to  be  compounded 
of  Ori  (summit,  top,  head)  and  Sha  (to  select, 
choose),  though  some  natives  prefer  to  derive  it  from 
ri  to  see,  and  isha  choice,  and  thus  to  make  it  mean 
one  who  sees  the  cult.  Bishop  Johnson  says  these 
deities  are  generally  known  among  us  as  Orishas,  and 
that  they  were  spoken  of  as  “ Awon  ti  o ri  sha,” 
i.e.  those  who  were  successful  in  making  their 
collection  of  the  wisdom  strewn  about  by  the  son  of 
1 Mine  R.  E.  D. 


G 


82 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


God.  But  it  is  more  likely  that  the  word  is  composed 
of  Ore  departed  spirit,  and  Isha  one  who  is  chosen, 
selected  or  cut  off,  or,  in  other  words,  the  beatified 
departed  one.  Among  the  Bini  the  word  Orisha 
is  pronounced  Oyisha,1  a compound  of  the  word 
Oye  a title  of  honour  expressing  wisdom  of  the 
elders,2  and  Isha,  one  who  is  chosen.  La  in  this  word 
Orishala  has  the  meaning  of  to  split.3 

Oba,  in  Obatala,  the  other  name  for  Orishala, 
is  also  a title  of  honour,  meaning  Emperor,  King. 
Ta  means  to  produce  as  yams  are  produced  from  split 
seed  yams.  There  is  therefore  little  or  no  difference 
in  the  meaning  of  the  words  Orishala  and  Obatala, 
and,  as  Bishop  Crowther  says,  Orishala  and  Obatala 
are  one.4 

Orishala. 

A story  told  me  by  an  Egba  called  Salako  shows 
that  Obatala  as  a god  is  the  person  who  sensitises 
matter : 

“He  is  the  son  of  Odudua,  and  was  sent  to 
do  good  on  earth.  When  anyone  is  sick  he 

1 Oye  may  be  derived  from  Yeye  Mother,  while  Oba  may  be  shortened 
from  Baba  Father,  so  that  Oyishala  and  Obatala  may  be  the  female  and 
male  form  of  the  same  idea.  The  word  Orisha  and  Oyisha  is,  however, 
used  in  much  the  same  sense  as  the  word  Nkici  (plural  Bakici  ba  ci 
among  the  Bavili,  which  1 have  translated  as  the  speaking  powers  on 
earth.  The  late  Bishop  Crowther  translates  the  word  as  deity,  gods, 
idols. 

2 Compare  Kulu  in  the  Congo. 

3 I may  point  out  that  the  idea  of  splitting,  separating,  is  also 
connected  with  the  idea  of  Creator  in  the  Congo — Xivanga  = one  who  keeps 
on  splitting,  or  Creator.  Orishala  may  be  a dialectical  form  of  Orishanla 
Orisha  and  nla  ; nla  being  an  adjective  meaning  big  or  great. 

4 See  his  Vocabulary  and  Dictionary  of  the  Yoruba  language. 


VII 


OBATALA 


83 

will  tell  them  what  leaf  to  get  and  they  will  get 
well.  If  any  woman  wanted  a child,  any  leaf  he 
cut  and  gave  to  her  would  have  the  desired 
effect.  Then  the  people  thanked  Odudua  for 
sending  him,  and  said  he  was  a good  man.  Then 
Odudua  made  the  body  of  man  and  called 
Obatala  to  do  the  rest,  and  so  Obatala  made  the 
fingers,  the  eyes,  the  mouth,  the  ears. 

They  who  worship  him  used  to  call  him 
Obatala  to  da  oju,  imu,  eti,  emi,  ati  apari 
shikokanlelogun — Oba  who  makes  the  eyes,  the 
mouth,  ears,  nose,  and  the  skull  to  be,  twenty- 
one.1  ” 

When  he  finished  the  work,  Olodumare  breathed 
into  the  body  and  it  became  a living  being.  And 
so  Odudua  gave  orders  to  all  the  world  to  worship 
Obatala,  and  those  who  now  worship  him  are  the 
descendants  of  those  who  benefited  by  his  goodness 
when  he  came  on  earth.  And  now  he  is  Odudua’s 
mason  and  sculptor. 

All  things  that  Obatala  and  his  followers  wear  are 
white — white  chalk,  beads,  cap  and  cloth. 

Mr.  Pellegrin  gave  me  a story  of  Obatala  as  a 
person  or  King  ; he  said  : — 

“ Obatala  was  the  poorest  of  the  four  Kings  ; 
he  bought  an  Albino  as  a slave.  And  when 
famine  was  raging  he  had  nothing  to  eat,  and  he 
had  a wife  and  child  ; so  when  they  were  starving 
he  told  the  Albino  to  go  and  find  his  own  chop.2 

1 I believe  the  numeration  of  the  Yoruba  to  be  a kind  of  summary  of 
the  Orishas  and  their  attributes. 

2 Chop  = food. 


G 2 


84 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


He  went  crying  about  the  streets.  He  stood  at 
the  gate  of  the  town,  as  some  people  with  food 
might  be  coming.  That  day  a European  with 
his  retinue  came  accompanied  by  a dog.  The 
dog,  who  came  first  and  met  the  Albino,  was 
frightened  and  ran  back  to  his  master.  The 

master  came  to  find  out  what  had  frightened 
the  dog,  and  found  the  Albino  at  the  gate.  He 
asked  him  what  was  the  matter,  and  he  told  him 
his  story.  Then  the  European  asked  him  to  take 
him  to  his  master.  And  he  asked  Obatala  why, 
if  he  had  food  for  his  wife  and  child,  he  had 

none  for  his  slave  ? The  master  told  him  of  the 
famine,  and  said  he  had  sent  the  Albino  to  find 

his  own  ‘chop.’  Then  the  white  man,  seeing 

their  condition,  mixed  some  milk  for  them 
and  stayed  that  night.  Next  morning  when 
going  he  gave  them  food  and  money,  and  left. 
Obatalaka1  called  the  slave  to  come  and  count  it. 
But  they  did  not  dare  to  touch  it,  as  it  was  too 
white,2  so  they  took  a matchet  to  divide  it,  hence 
silver  is  called  Fadaka.3  After  this  Obatala 
became  the  richest  of  all  the  Kings.  The  white 
cloth  they  wear  to-day  is  owing  to  the  coming 
of  the  saviour  whiteman.  The  milk  they  mistook 
for  palm  wine,  so  they  do  not  drink  it. 

They  do  not  eat  dog  because  he  was  the  means 
of  pointing  out  the  Albino.” 

In  the  olden  days  each  great  town  was  enclosed 

1 Obatalaka  means  the  master  of  a poor  man. 

2 See  page  89,  where  Obatala  is  said  to  have  made  the  brain,  nerves  and 
skull,  or  the  white  parts  of  the  body.  The  dark  part,  i.e.  the  blood  and 
flesh,  are  evidently  the  part  Odudua  created. 

3 Fa  to  shave,  scrape  ; Da  to  be  scarce,  hence  a time  of  dearth  ; Ka  to 
take  a quantity  out  of  a soft  mass. 


VII 


OBATALA 


85 

within  four  great  walls  in  the  same  way,  as  the 
Yorubas  say,  that  their  kingdom  was  ; and  leading 
out  of  the  city  were  four  great  roads  (God’s  roads, 
as  the  Bavili  called  them),  which  passed  through 
four  great  gates.  The  Balogun,  or  war  chief,  is  the 
guardian  of  these  on  earth,  and  Orishala  or  Obatala 
is  said  to  be  the  spiritual  Balogun  and  protector 
of  these  gates.1 

The  mother  among  the  Bavili,  and  also  the  Yoruba, 
acts  as  a kind  of  Treasurer.  She  guards  the  wealth 
of  the  family.  In  the  case  of  the  town,  the  war  chief, 
representing  motherhood,  guards  the  wealth  of  the 
town  from  pillage.  It  would  seem  as  if  Orishala 
(the  female  form  of  Obatala)  referred  to  the  mother 
in  the  oldest  form  of  parental  government,  and  that 
the  name  was  altered  when  the  family  had  increased 
and  multiplied,  and  the  mother’s  brother  had,  under 
the  name  of  Obatala,  taken  her  place  in  the  developed 
Council. 

1 The  names  of  the  gates  at  Abeokuta  are  now  : 

Bode  Alafinwa. 

„ Shodeke. 


CHAPTER  VIII 

IFA  AND  THE  FOUR  WALLS  OF  THE  YORUBA  KINGDOM 

Oja  through  Togun  told  me  that  Eleda  fought  with 
I fa,  in  consequence  of  which  he  became  a hearing 
speaking,  seeing,  thinking  being,  and  that  this  sensi- 
tising of  I fa  was  accomplished  through  Obatala. 
Bishop  Crowther  translates  the  word  Eleda  as  Creator, 
Supreme  Being.  Ellis  says  it  is  another  name  for 
Olorun,  the  Yoruba  sky  god,  in  his  capacity  as  the 
controller  of  rains. 

The  literal  meaning  of  Ele  is  “ a piece  patched  on,” 
and  da  means  to  make,  which  seems  to  back  up 
Togun’s  statement  that  Eleda  was  a creative  power 
told  off  to  perform  the  perfecting  of  Ifa.  Bishop 
Johnson  tells  us  (see  Appendix,  At  the  Back  of  the 
Black  Mans  Mind ) that  Ela  is  another  name  for  Ifa, 
although  the  name  is  often  used  as  if  it  represented  a 
separate  and  distinct  divine  personality.  From  this  it 
would  appear  that  the  word  Eleda  is  composed  of  Ela 
and  Eda,  Ela  meaning  a piece  severed  from  a larger 
piece,  and  Eda  the  making  ; thus  Eleda  would  mean 
not  God,  but  the  act  of  making  Ifa  or  Ela,  the  word 

Ifa  meaning  a piece  that  is  scraped  off  or  created. 

86 


ch.  viii  IFA  AND  THE  FOUR  WALLS  OF  YORUBA  87 

Ifa  is  the  first-born  or  Oni 1 of  Odudua  and  Obatala. 
He  is  known  by  the  names  Awnomila,  the  calabash  in 
which  the  sixteen  sacred  palm  nuts  are  kept,  the  name, 
also,  that  Oja  gave  for  the  sacred  stones  at  Ife  ; Akpani 
ebora  ynagiddi  Odudua,  or  Odudua’s  private  secretary, 
Elerin  ipin,  or  one  who  laughs ; Afo  yo  manitaw ; 
or  a man  who  shakes  his  mouth  but  does  not  speak. 

He  is  the  Oracular2  deity  about  whom  most  is 
known,  and  who  is  most  often  consulted.  A very 
good  descripton  is  given  of  him  by  Colonel  Ellis  in  his 
“ Yoruba-speaking  People,”  page  56,  and  by  Bishop 
Johnson  in  his  “Yoruba  Heathenism,”  and  many  of 
his  wise  sayings  are  to  be  found  in  Bishop  C.  Phillips’ 
book  called  “ Ifa.” 

That  Ifa’s  Councils  are  god-like  can  be  inferred  from 
the  following  quotation  of  one  of  his  sayings  given  by 
Adesola  in  the  Nigerian  Chronicle  : — 

E so’tito  e se  rere 
Eni  so’tito  ni  imole  i gbe 

Be  faithful  be  good 

For  the  faithful  and  good  are  favourites 
of  the  gods. 

Olotito  ab’ona  tororo 
Osika  ab’ona  gbarara 
K’eni  ma  seke 
K’eni  ma  dale 

Odale  bale  ku 
Eni  dale  a bale  lo 

1 Ifa  calls  the  first-born  Oni,  the  one  who  has  ; the  second-born  Ola,  the 
saviour  ; the  third  Otunla,  the  day  after  to-morrow  ; and  the  fourth  Kokoro 
Kundu  Eru  Oni.  2 See  Chapter  XV. 


88 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


Narrow  yet  straight  is  the  path 
of  righteousness. 

But  broad  and  many-sided  are  the  ways 
of  the  wicked 
In  purpose  be  thou  true 
Not  given  to  perfidy 

For  the  work  of  the  perfidious  will  o’er-take  him 
The  evil  of  the  wicked  shall  slay  him. 

I fa  as  head  of  the  priestly  government  of  the  Yoruba 
is  the  greatest  Orisha  or  Nkici,  the  priestly  King  in 
Heaven,  who,  as  the  first  Oni,  is  the  priestly  King  (or 
Nkici’ci ) on  earth.  The  following  legends  describe 
him  as  a great  prophet  on  earth: — 

Mr.  Oyesile  Keribo,1  in  a Yoruba  pamphlet 
published  in  August,  1906,  on  the  History  of  the  Gods, 
writes  on  Ifa  (page  19)  to  this  effect: — 

“ Ifa  was  a native  of  Itase,  near  Ife  country,  and 
of  poor  parentage : in  his  youth  he  had  great 
aversion  to  manual  labour  and  therefore  had  to  beg 
his  bread.  To  better  his  condition  he  applied  to  a 
sage  for  advice,  and  the  latter  taught  him  divination, 
traditional  stories  with  matters  relating  thereto  and 
medicine  as  an  easy  means  of  obtaining  a livelihood. 
He  afterwards  became  very  popular.  The  sixteen 
original  Odus  correspond  with  the  sixteen  original 
stories  taught  to  Ifa,  etc.  His  parents  being  poor 
were  not  known  in  the  country,  hence  he  was  after- 
wards considered  to  be  without  parentage  and  deified 
after  death.” 

1 Mr.  Keribo’s  pamphlet  was  printed  by  the  Egba  Government 
Printing  Press  (August  22,  1906),  and  widely  circulated  at  6d.  a copy 
there  and  in  other  parts  of  the  Yoruba  country. 


VIII  IFA  AND  THE  FOUR  WALLS  OF  YORUBA  89 

In  the  Nigerian  Chronicle  of  March  12,  1909, 
writing  on  I fa,  Mr.  F.  S.,  a correspondent  of  that 
paper,  says  : — 

11  If  a was  born  at  Ife,  the  cradle  of  the  Yoruba 
people.  He  was  a skilful  medical  man,  who  had  an 
extensive  practice  and  was  an  eminently  successful 
diviner. 

After  he  had  become  famous  he  founded  a town 
called  Ipetu,  and  became  king  of  the  place  and  was 
styled  Alapetu. 

He  was  very  popular,  and  was  regarded  by  his 
contemporaries  as  a true  prophet.  People  from  every 
part  of  the  Yoruba  country  flocked  to  him  and 
patronised  him.  His  fame  was  so  great  that  hundreds 
of  persons  from  different  towns  begged  him  to  admit 
them  as  disciples  and  apprentices  under  him.  Out  of 
these,  we  are  told,  he  chose  only  sixteen  men  from 
about  as  many  different  towns — from  Ekiti,  from 
Oyo,  from  Ijebu,  and  many  other  places  widely 
separated.1  The  names  of  these  apprentices  or 
disciples  are  said  to  be  identical  with  the  names  of 
the  sixteen  divinitatory  signs  called  Odus,  and  the 
order  of  precedence  among  them,  which  was  probably 
based  upon  priority  of  appointment,  is  said  to  be  still 
preserved  in  the  present  order2  of  the  Odus." 

An  intelligent  native  called  “ Ifebode  ” gave  me  the 
following  story  about  I fa  : — 

“ Ifa  was  a human  being  who  used  to  make 
medicine,  and  sell  it.  While  doing  this  he  got  to 
Ife,  and  made  that  his  headquarters.  One  day  all 

1 See  Chapter  XV. 

2 This  is  most  important.  See  Chapter  XV. 


90 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


the  Ife  people  joined  together  to  fight  him.  Then 
he  got  vexed  and  went  into  the  earth,  and  when 
they  asked  him  to  come  out  he  refused  unless  they 
agreed  to  worship  him.  The  day  he  entered  the 
earth  he  cut  four  palm  leaves  to  mark  the  place, 
and  they  each  immediately  became  a palm  tree — 
each  tree  had  four  branches,  or  sixteen  in  all.  He 
told  them  to  pick  sixteen  nuts,  which  he  said  they 
must  worship,  and  ask  him  whatever  they  wanted. 
From  then,  anyone  who  got  these  nuts  became  a 
Babalawo  and  became  diviners,  and  these  nuts  teach 
him  what  leaves  to  pick  to  cure  any  sickness. 

The  Babalawos  at  Ife  wear  cloths  of  light  blue.” 

We  have  noted  that  one  of  Ifa’s  names  is  Awnomila, 
and  that  he  was  the  first  Oni,  that  the  present  Oni  of 
Ife  called  the  pillar  of  stone,  which  Oja  called 
Awnomila,  the  stick  of  Oranyan,  the  first  Oni  of  Ife. 
Now  the  word  Oraniyan  1 means  “ a matter  of  dispute,” 
so  that  we  may  conclude  that  there  is  some  dispute  as 
to  the  first  Oni’s  name.2 

In  a later  chapter  we  shall  discuss  the  names  of  the 
Odus,  or  16+1  sacred  nuts  of  I fa,  which  we  only 
mention  in  this  place  because  the  number  of  the 
sons  of  the  first  Oni  is  said  to  be  16,  and  the  number 
of  his  daughters  i,  or  16+  i offspring. 

A hunter,  said  to  be  a priest  of  I fa,  was  introduced 
to  me  by  Mr.  J.  T.  Palmer,  a native  trader  residing  at 
Sapele,  and  the  number  and  names  of  the  offspring  of 
the  first  Oni,  Oranyan,  given  by  him  were  confirmed 

1 Crowther  writes  the  word  Oraniyan  or  Oroiyan  (see  his  Dictionary, 
page  231). 

2 We  should  say  Mr.  What’s-his-name. 


VIII  IFA  AND  THE  FOUR  WALLS  OF  YORUBA  91 

by  my  friend  Oliyitan,  another  priest  of  Ifa,  three 
years  afterwards,  at  Olokemeji. 

The  hunter  said  that  the  Oni  was  suffering  from 
some  eye  complaint,  and  thought  he  was  going  to  die, 
so  he  divided  all  his  goods  amongst  his  children  and 
ordered  them  to  go  to  certain  villages  and  live. 
Alafin  was  forgotten,  so  he  was  given  all  the  land 
owned  by  the  Oni. 

The  present  Oni  of  Ife  showed  me  the  door  through 
which  on  another  occasion  the  future  King  of  Benin 
City  passed  when  he  was  sent  away  to  occupy  the 
land  of  the  Efa.1  And  he  stated  that  Ilesha  was  not 
sent  out  for  a long  time  after  his  brothers,  because  the 
Oni  of  that  time  loved  him,  and  wished  him  to  be  near 
to  him. 

In  all  matters  referring  to  land,  the  Alafin  takes 
the  place  of  his  progenitor  the  Oni,  and  the  present 
positions  of  the  two  great  Yoruba  chiefs,  Alafin  and 
Oni,  are  equivalent  to  those  of  our  King  and  of  the 
Archbishop  of  Canterbury. 

The  list  of  the  names  is  as  follows  : — 

(1)  Alafin,  the  youngest  son,  the  head  of  the 
Oyos,  the  owner  of  the  Palace,  the  one  who 
takes  the  place  of  the  Oni  in  mundane 
affairs,  the  head  of  the  officers  of  the 
Council 2 or  Ogboni. 

o 

(2)  Olowu,  from  whom  the  Egbas  are  des- 

cended, who,  as  an  officer,  may  have  repre- 
sented the  treasurer. 

1 This  custom  of  the  Kings’  sons  being  sent  out  to  govern  provinces  has 
been  handed  down  and  strictly  adhered  to  by  the  Bini. 

2 See  Chapter  X.  on  Yemaja  and  the  Ogboni. 


92 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


(3)  Awujale,  from  whom  the  Jebus  are  descended, 

who,  as  an  officer  of  this  ancient  Ogboni, 
may  possibly  have  acted  as  executioner. 

(4)  Alaketu,  from  whom  the  Ketus  are  des- 

cended, and  who,  in  this  Ogboni,  appears 
to  have  acted  as  the  arbitrator. 

These  four  great  ones,  the  officers  as  it  were  of 
the  first  Ogboni,  are  compared  to  the  complete 
Yoruba  Kingdom,  which  they  say  was  enclosed  by 
four  walls.  Their  saying  is  Igun  merin  ni  ile  ini,  a 
house  is  composed  of  four  corners  ( i.e . four  walls), 
and  is  not  otherwise  complete. 

We  find  in  Abeokuta  four  kings,  the  Alake  being 
at  present  the  paramount  chief,  so  that  I conclude 
that  each  of  the  above  four  great  ones,  composing 
the  Yoruba  Kingdom,  took  three  other  sons  of  the 
first  Oni  with  him.  I regret  to  say  that  I cannot 
say  who  the  three  were  in  each  case,  so  that  I must 
leave  this  matter  in  the  hands  of  some  future 
historian,  but  the  names  of  the  Councillors  or  sons 
are  as  follows  : — 

Obalado,  the  founder  of  Ado,  where  I fa  is  said 
to  have  been  born. 

Oba  Baruba,  the  founder  of  Barita,  a town 
north  of  Ilorin. 

Oni  Moba,  said  to  be  another  name  for 
Shango. 

These  three  possibly  accompanied  the  Alafin. 

Oluhu,  said  to  be  one  of  the  four  Kings  of 
Egba  land. 


VIII  IFA  AND  THE  FOUR  WALLS  OF  YORUBA  93 

Owa.  1 to  part  Qf  jfa’s  ta]^ 

Ore  J 

Oba  Shabi,  possibly  the  founder  of  the  county 
in  Ketuland,  where  Orungan  had  his 
farm,  and  from  where  I fa  is  said  to 
have  procured  his  sixteen  sacred  nuts. 

Ajeru,  I fa’s  messenger. 

Orogun,  to  do  with  divination. 

Ewi  u Osoin,  an  Orisha  said  to  speak  in  a 
small  voice. 

Ajank  Moba,  part  of  I fa’s  talk. 

Alara,  the  owner  of  thunder. 

The  Babalawo  Oliyitan  described  all  the  above  as 
parts  of  I fa,  and  as  among  these  parts  we  find  the 
ancestors  of  the  Oyo,  Egba,  Ijebu  and  Iketu 
(the  four  walls  of  the  Yoruba  Kingdom),  the  con- 
nection between  Ifa,  the  first  Oni,  and  the  walls  is 
self-evident. 

It  is  very  difficult  to  separate  Eshu  from  Ifa,  as 
we  have  noticed  in  considering  the  days  of  the 
week,  so  I will  now  tell  you  something  about  this 
personage. 


CHAPTER  IX 

ESHU 

Elegba  and  Eshu  are  translated  Devil.  In  the  form 
of  an  earthenware  pot  with  a hole  in  it,  Eshu  is  repre- 
sented in  many  villages.  In  some  form  or  other 
under  a small  shed,  Eshu  is  found  at  the  entrance  of 
a town  or  house.  Whatever  Orishas  the  people  may 
have,  Eshu  appears  to  be  the  most  widespread  (see 
At  the  Back  of  the  Black  Man  s Mind , pages  197,  190, 
22i,  223,  234,  246,  265). 

The  first  blood  of  a sacrifice  is  generally  splashed 
over  Eshu,  so  that  he  may  not  prevent  the  Orisha 
to  whom  the  sacrifice  is  made  from  accepting  the 
offering. 

I think  the  explanation  of  the  fact  that  the  native 
looks  upon  the  number  of  Orishas  as  201  or  401  is 
that  Eshu  possibly  has  the  same  number  of  malevolent 
Orishas  as  I fa  has  of  beneficent. 

I have  pointed  out  in  At  the  Back  of  the  Black 
Mans  Mind , page  197,  that  Eshu  represents  the  pro- 
creative  trinity,  as  opposed  to  the  spiritual  Oyisa. 
(see  also  chapter  on  the  Odus  of  I fa,  where  Odu  is 
the  name  of  the  sign  of  the  new  moon  called  Oshu). 


94 


CH.  IX 


ESHU 


95 


Eshu1  is  the  Being  of  Darkness,  while  Ifa  is  the 
Being  of  Light  and  Revelation,  personalities  whose 
signs  are  Oshu  the  new  moon  and  Orun  the  sun. 

At  Akure  some  people  came  dancing  up  to  the  rest- 
house  where  I was  staying  holding  palm  branches  in 
their  hands  and  beating  drums  in  a violent  way.  I 
asked  them  what  they  were  doing.  They  answered 
that  they  were  sacrificing  to  the  devil.  Well,  I 
assured  them,  “ I am  not  the  devil.”  They  laughed 
and  ran  away,  leaving  me  rather  in  doubt  as  to 
whether  they  thought  me  so  or  not.  On  inquiry  I 
heard  that  in  three  days  they  were  going  to  keep  the 
feast  of  Ifa,  and  that  preparatory  to  doing  so  they  had 
to  feast  Eshu  or  the  devil. 

The  three  Phallic  pillars  at  Iaiu  were  called  Eshu 
(See  At  the  Back  of  the  Black  Man  s Mind,  page  195). 
Ellis  tells  us  “He  is  supposed  always  to  carry  a short 
knotted  club,  which,  originally  intended  to  be  a rude 
representation  of  the  Phallus,  has  partly  through  want 
of  skill  ....  and  partly  through  the  growing  belief 
in  Elegba’s  malevolence,  come  to  be  regarded  as  a 
weapon  of  offence.  . . . The  rude  wooden  representa- 
tion of  the  Phallus  is  planted  m the  earth  by  the  side 
of  the  hut,  and  is  seen  in  almost  every  public  place, 
while  at  certain  festivals  it  is  paraded  in  great  pomp, 
and  pointed  towards  the  young  girls,  who  dance 
round  it.” 

It  was  Elegba  who  told  Ifa  where  to  go  for  the 
sixteen  palm  nuts  and  who  taught  that  personage  how 


1 See  note,  Chapter  VI.,  and  note,  Chapter  X. 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CH.  IX 


96 

to  divine,1  and  he  stipulated  that  in  return  for  this 
instruction  he  should  always  be  allowed  the  first 
choice  of  all  offerings.  This  possibly  accounts  for 
Eshu  getting  the  first  part  of  the  blood  of  every 
sacrifice. 

Eshu 

As  the  story  goes,  Odudua  has  no  other  Orisha 
except  I fa,  and,  whenever  he  2 consulted  anyone,  he 
consulted  Ifa.  Ifa  came  one  day  to  sacrifice  to 
Odudua,  and  he  was  very  satisfied  with  the  offering. 
As  it  is  a rule  when  a chief  is  pleased  with  the 
services  of  a person  to  give  him  something,  so,  on 
this  occasion,  Odudua  gave  Ifa  Eshu.  Thus  Eshu 
was  the  slave  of  Odudua,  and  became  I fa’s  messenger. 
And  when  anyone  wants  to  sacrifice  to  Ifa  they  say 
that  it  is  best  to  square  his  messenger,3  as  he  is  a 
wicked  person. 

1 See  appendix  At  the  Back  of  the  Black  Marts  Mind , page  270. 

2 Odudua  is  here  spoken  of  as  he,  and  if  we  remember  that  Odudua 
stands  for  the  Dowager  Queen  Mother  and  so  for  the  ancestor  her 
husband  this  confusion  is  easily  understood. 

3 Opele  (See  At  the  Back  of  the  Black  Man's  Mind , page  233)  is 
spoken  of  as  Ifa’s  messenger  and  offspring. 


CHAPTER  X 

AGANJU,  YEMOJA,  THEIR  OFFSPRING,  AND  THE  OGBONl 
OR  COUNCIL 

The  Bashorun  is  not  only  one  of  the  four  great  chiefs, 
but  also  the  chief  officer  of  the  Council  of  State  or 
Ogboni.1  We  may  expect,  therefore,  to  find  that  Ifa  is 
not  only  one  of  the  four  great  Orishas,  but  also  the 
chief  officer  of  the  godly  Council  of  Orishas.  And 
so  it  is  except  that  here  Ifa  is  represented  by  Eshu.2 

Aganju  and  Yemoja  are  said  to  have  been  the 
offspring  of  Odudua  and  Obatala,  and  it  is  related  that 
they  had  a son  called  Orungan.  These  then  are  the 
three  officers  presided  over  by  the  great  procreative 
Orisha  Eshu.  And  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  here 
again  we  have  the  formula  of  four,  Eshu  representing 
the  past,  and  Aganju,  Yemoja  and  Orungan,  the 
Trinity  of  Father,  Mother,  Son. 

Aganju  is  sometimes  described  as  a younger 
brother  of  Jakuta,  but  very  little  is  known  about  him, 
except  that  the  word  means  “ Space  ” or  “ Expanse.” 


1 Ogboni  is  both  the  society  of  that  name  containing  many  members 
and  also  the  council  and  offices  of  the  King’s  cabinet. 

2 See  page  ioo,  Chapter  X. 


97 


H 


98 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


Yemoja  a great  River  Spirit  (the  mother  of  the 
shining  light)  is  the  mother  of  Orungan,  the  heat  of 
the  sun  at  mid-day  (passion  ?). 

Orungan  is  known  as  Fi  rin  pon  na  yanju  omo 
Yemoja — The  son  of  Yemoja  (who)  cleans  his  eyes 
(with)  a hot  iron,  or  Erin  re  bi  ija  omo  Oba  Afeleja — 
His  laugh  is  like  fighting  the  son  of  the  King  who 
fights  with  the  sword  (or  Ogun). 

Yemoja,  or  Ye  mo  aja,  is  the  most  important 
perhaps  of  these  three,  as  from  her  sprang  the  twelve 
or  thirteen  Orishas  forming  the  deified  Ogboni  or 
Council. 

Yeye  means  mother,  and  Aiye  means  earth  ; Mo  is 
to  shine,  and  Aja  is  short  for  Aja-Osu,  a name  by 
which  the  dog  star  is  known,  whereas  Orun  is  the 
name  of  the  sun  or  day  star.  Thus  we  get  the  picture 
of  earth,  mother  (of  the)  shining  star  or  sun. 

Now  Orungan  (Ellis1  tells  us)  “fell  in  love  with  his 
mother,  and,  as  she  refused  to  listen  to  his  guilty 
passion,  he  one  day  took  advantage  of  his  father’s 
absence  and  ravished  her.  Immediately  after  the  act 
Yemoja  sprang  to  her  feet,  and  fled  from  the  place 
wringing  her  hands  and  lamenting,  and  was  pursued 
by  Orungan  who  strove  to  console  her  by  saying  that 
no  one  should  know  of  what  had  occurred,  and  declared 
that  he  could  not  live  without  her.  He  held  out  to 
her  the  alluring  prospect  of  living  with  two  husbands, 
one  acknowledged,  and  the  other  in  secret,  but  she 
rejected  all  his  proposals  with  loathing,  and  continued 
to  run  away.  Orungan,  however,  rapidly  gained  upon 
1 See  Ellis,  Yoruba-speaking  People , p.  54. 


X AGANJU,  YEMOJA,  THEIR  OFFSPRING  99 

her,  and  was  just  stretching  out  his  hand  to  seize  her 
when  she  fell  backward  to  the  ground.  Then  her 
body  immediately  began  to  swell  in  a fearful  manner, 
two  streams  of  water  gushed  from  her  breasts,  and  her 
abdomen  burst  open.  The  streams  from  Yemoja’s 
breasts  joined  and  formed  a lagoon  ; and  from  her 
gaping  body  came  the  following  offspring.” 

Before  we  continue  our  study  of  Yemoja’s  offspring 
I should  like  to  interpret  this  story  of  creation  as 
far  as  we  have  gone  in  my  own  words. 

I do  not  think  it  follows  that  because  there  is  such 
a sameness  about  these  stories  of  creation  that  they 
must  necessarily  be  different  variants  of  any  acknow- 
ledged version.  “Great  minds  think  alike,”  the 
saying  goes,  and  in  this  way  great  men  in  many  parts 
of  the  world  still  come  to  much  the  same  conclusions. 
The  intelligent  Yoruba  is,  however,  constantly 
discovering  resemblances  in  his  laws,  customs  and 
folklore  to  that  of  the  Old  Testament;  it  may 
therefore  be  well,  without  changing  the  natural  order 
of  the  Orishas,  to  point  out  where  their  ideas,  though 
differently  expressed,  evidently  refer  to  the  same 
phenomena. 

Odudua  has  been  shown  to  express  the  ideas  of 
self-existence,  heaven  and  earth,  darkness, 
and  so  as  a heading  may  easily  be  made 
to  stand  for  “ In  the  beginning  God  made 
heaven  and  earth  ....  and  darkness  was 
upon  the  face  of  the  deep.” 

Jakuta  has  been  connected  with  thunder,  and  so 
electricity.  “ And  the  Spirit  of  God  moved 

h 2 


100 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


Obatala  upon  the  face  of  the  waters  ” (or  white 1 
vapours),  just  as  Fatherhood  and  Mother- 
hood meet  in  marriage.  Obatala,  though  a 
male  personage,  it  must  be  remembered, 
stands  for  maternity. 

I fa  Ideas  of  speech  and  revelation  and  light  are 

connected  with  I fa — “ And  God  said,  Let 
there  be  light : and  there  was  light.” 

Eshu 2 The  personality  connected  with  darkness  : 
“ And  God  divided  the  Light  from  the 
Darkness.” 

Aganju  Expanse,  space.  Ferrar  Fenton  in  his 
translation  of  Genesis  instead  of  the  word 
“Firmament”  uses  the  word  “Expanse” — 
“ And  God  said,  Let  there  be  an  ‘ expanse  ’ 
between  the  waters  and  the  waters  and  let 
it  be  for  a division  between  the  waters  and 
the  waters.” 

Yemoja  is  a great  water  spirit  as  well  as  mother 
earth  : “ Let  the  waters  below  the  heavens 
be  collected  in  one  place,  and  let  dry  land 
appear.” 

Orungan  the  heated  rays  from  the  sun  which  produce 
— “ Let  the  earth  produce.” 

The  Yoruba  has  only  four  days  in  his  week,  and 
we  find  that  each  day  is  dedicated  to  an  Orisha. 

In  the  first  place  we  have  God  separating  from 
himself  two  great  persons  to  help  him  in  Creation. 

1 White  is  sacred  to  Obatala. 

2 In  Eshu’s  other  name  Elegba  we  have  the  words  gba  to  strike  with  a 
stick,  Ela  another  word  for  Ifa,  meaning  that  which  is  stripped  or  split  off. 
In  each  of  the  three  parts  we  have  a division  or  splitting  off — light  from 
darkness,  division  of  waters  and  waters,  land  from  water. 


X AGANJU,  YEMOJA,  THEIR  OFFSPRING  ioi 

Arranging  these  personages  and  phenomena  in  sets 
of  fours  in  the  manner  in  which  the  sons  of  Oranyan 
were  arranged,  we  have  : 

Odudua  Jakuta  Obatala  I fa 

Eshu,  Devil  Aganju,  space  Yemoja  Orungan 

Dudu,  black  Orun,  heaven  Aiye,  earth  Imole, 

light 

Oshu,  new  Omi,  water  lie,  land  Orun,  sun 

moon 


From  this  it  will  be  noted  that  the  sun  and  moon 
fall  into  the  fourth  line,  but  I do  not  think  the  native 
would  say  that  the  sun  and  moon  were  made  on  the 
fourth  day,  but  rather  that  they  were  manifestations 
of  Odudua  and  I fa  in  the  fourth  place. 

To  return  to  the  Ogboni  of  Orishas,  Ellis  gives  the 
list  of  Yemoja’s  offspring  as  follows  : — 


Dada 

Shango 

Ogun 

Olokun 

Olosa 

Oya 

Oshun 

Oba 

Orisha  Oko 

Oshosi 

Oke, 

Aje  Shaluga, 
Shankpana 


god  of  vegetables 
,,  lightning 
,,  iron  and  war 
,,  sea 

goddess  of  the  lagoon 

,,  ,,  River  Niger 

,,  ,,  ,,  Oshun 


Oba 


god  of  agriculture 
,,  hunters 
,,  mountains, 
,,  wealth, 

,,  smallpox, 


Orun 

Oshu 


the  sun,  and 
the  moon. 


102 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


From  this  it  is  seen  that  Ellis  gives  Yemoja  as 
the  mother  of  the  sun  and  moon.  I have  made 
many  inquiries  about  this,  and  none  of  my  in- 
formants have  included  them  in  their  lists  of  the 
offspring  of  this  Orisha.  And  from  what  I have 
written  above  I think  it  is  clear  that  the  sun  and 
the  new  moon,  as  personalities,  are  I fa1  and  Eshu. 
Neither  have  I ever  been  able  to  get  anyone  to 
agree  with  the  order  given  by  Ellis.  The  names, 
however,  of  the  other  Orishas  agree  with  those  I 
have  collected. 

The  names  and  order,  so  far  as  I have  been  able 
to  discover,  are  : — 

( Olokun,  the  owner  of  the  sea  which  murmurs. 

1 Olosa,  owner  of  the  lagoon  which  evaporates. 

f Ogun,  the  one  that  pounds. 

\ Oshowsi,  the  enchanter  that  is. 

( Oke,  the  one  who  cherishes. 

\ Shango,  Lightning. 

( Oshun,  the  one  who  gathers  together. 

\ Oko,  the  one  who  collects. 

{Oya,  the  one  who  plucks. 

Shaluga,  who  elevates,  enriches. 

( Oba  or  Ibu,  the  one  who  bakes  or  boils. 

| Buruku  (or  Shankpana),  to  rot,  to  die,  and 
Dada,  the  Orisha  of  birth. 

As  I have  travelled  nearly  all  over  the  Yoruba 
country  I have  obtained  the  order  of  sacrifice 
to  Orishas  in  towns  widely  apart,  and  now  give 
them  to  show  how  far  the  worship  in  these  different 
places  agrees,  firstly  as  to  the  Orishas  worshipped, 

1 See  figure,  page  1 50,  Chapter  XV. 


X AGANJU,  YEMOJA,  THEIR  OFFSPRING  103 

and  secondly  as  to  the  order  in  which  their  festivals 
are  kept.  As  some  fourteen  years  have  passed 
since  Colonel  Ellis  wrote  his  Yoruba-speaking 
People , it  is  possible  that  some  changes  have 
taken  place,  not  only  in  the  original  order,  but  also 
in  the  number  of  local  Orishas,  or  it  may  be  that 
local  traditions  have  been  too  strong,  and  that  the 
order  in  which  the  Orishas  set  apart  by  I fa  as  the 
offspring  of  Yemoja  to  be  worshipped  has  never 
been  fully  adopted. 

The  following  are  the  lists  as  given  to  me  in  a 
few  important  towns. 


Akure. 

Isehin. 

Awaye. 

I. 

1 

Alla. 

2. 

2 

Oshun. 

3- 

4- 

5- 

(0 

(2) 

\ 

6. 

3 

I fa. 

1 1 

I fa. 

19 

I fa. 

7- 

4 

Iweshu. 

I 2 

Elegba. 

20 

Shango. 

8. 

5 

Agbarigbo. 

13 

Yemoja. 

2 1 

Orisha 

Oko. 

c 

0 

9- 

6 

Olokun. 

14 

Oshun. 

22 

Obatala. 

C/3 

nJ 

<U 

10. 

7 

Idala. 

15 

Shango. 

23  Yemoja. 

1 1. 

8 

Aiyarigbi. 

l6 

Orisha 

£ 

Oko. 

c3 

12. 

9 

Oile  and 

17 

Oke. 

Oloba. 

i3- 

10 

Ibegun. 

l8 

Orishaula. 

> 

1 and  2 See  chapter  on  the  Seasons  and  the  original  division  of  time 
which  only  took  note  of  the  Rainy  Season. 


io4  NIGERIAN  STUDIES  chap. 


Egbados. 

Ife. 

Oyo. 

24. 

Shango. 

35- 

Orishala  or 

48. 

Egungun. 

25- 

Orisha  Oko. 

Ole. 

49. 

Shanpona. 

26. 

Oshowsi. 

36- 

Alashe. 

50. 

Oke. 

27. 

Oshun. 

37- 

Orisha  Teku. 

Si- 

Kuku. 

28. 

Ogun. 

38. 

Ogara. 

52. 

Shango  and 

29. 

Ifa. 

39- 

Okun. 

Oya. 

30. 

Orisha  Oko, 

40. 

Ifa. 

53- 

Ifa. 

wife. 

41- 

Ogun  and 

54- 

Orisha  Oko. 

3 T- 

Shapana. 

Oranyan. 

55- 

Eynile. 

32- 

Olofin. 

42. 

Mori  mi. 

56. 

Yemoja. 

33- 

Yewa. 

43- 

Oranfe. 

57- 

Oshun. 

34- 

Eserikika. 

44. 

Odudua. 

58. 

Eshu. 

No  sacrifice. 

45- 

Ojumo. 

59- 

Orishaula. 

do. 

46. 

Iro. 

bo. 

Oro. 

47- 

Ikeri. 

It 

: is  possible  that  in 

the  last  three  lists 

two  Orishas 

are 

worshipped 

every 

lunar  month,  or  one  every 

seventeenth  day  during  the  rainy  season. 

It  is  evident  that  at  the  present  day  there  is  no 
order  common  to  the  different  sections  of  the  Yoruba 
people,  as  Ifa  is  about  the  only  one  to  whom  they 
sacrifice  at  the  same  time,  i.e.  at  the  beginning  of 
the  rains,  or  about  the  sixth  month. 

We  have  now  considered  the  four  supernatural 
great  chiefs  and  the  four  supernatural  officers  of  the 
spiritual  Ogboni,  and  given  the  names  of  the  offspring 
of  Yemoja,  who  evidently  form  the  supernatural 
Ogboni  or  Council. 

Before  describing  these  Orishas  more  at  length  I 
think  it  will  not  be  out  of  place  to  give  a complete  list 
of  the  names  of  the  officials  in  the  native  Government. 


X 


AGANJU,  YEMOJA,  THEIR  OFFSPRING  105 
The  names  of  the  officers  are  as  follows  : — 

1.  Iyalode,  the  Queen  Mother. 

2.  Oba,  the  King. 

3.  Balogun,  the  War  Chief. 

4.  Bashorun,  the  Prime  Minister. 

5.  Bashorun,  the  President. 

6.  Apena,  the  one  who  convenes 

the  meetings. 

7.  Oluwo,  the  Treasurer. 

8.  Adofin,  the  Arbitrator. 

The  Council. 

9.  Lisa,  one  of  the  Iwarefa. 

10.  Egbe  Iwarefa,  or  assistant  Iwarefa. 

11.  Bisa. 

12.  Assistant. 

13.  Bala. 

14.  Assistant. 

15.  Asalu. 

16.  Assistant. 

17.  Malakun. 

18.  Assistant. 

19.  Ashipa. 

20.  Assistant. 

These  last  fifteen  members  of  the  Government  are 
called  the  Ogboni,  composed  of  three  officers  and  a 
Council  of  six  Iwarefa  and  six  assistant  or  Egbe 
Iwarefa,  but  there  are  many  members  of  the  Ogboni 
as  a society. 

I will  now  show  how  the  offspring  of  Yemoja  are 
connected  with  the  life  and  occupation  of  the  Yoruba. 


The 

Officers. 


Four 

Great  Chiefs. 


CHAPTER  XI 


OLOKUN  OLOSA  AND  FISHERMAN 

Fishing 

As  we  approach  the  coast  of  Africa  from  Europe  the 
first  Africans  we  meet  are  fishermen.  It  is  true  that 
we  seldom  get  near  enough  to  the  tiny  fishing  canoes 
to  see  much  of  the  fisherman,  but  then  he  is  far  from 
us  and  sometimes  out  of  sight  of  land.  The  sea  in 
some  places  is  dotted  quite  thickly  with  the  canoes  of 
these  venturesome  natives,  whose  courage  and  manli- 
ness we  must  all  admire.  Confined  as  we  all  are  on 
board  even  the  most  comfortable  of  steamships  nearing 
the  end  of  our  trip  we  almost  envy  the  fisherman  his 
freedom  and  loneliness.  He  has  left  the  coast  early 
in  the  morning  with  the  land  breeze  and  when  the 
calm  sea  is  rippled  by  the  coming  sea  breeze  he  hoists 
his  little  sail  and  returns  to  his  home. 

As  we  pass  these  crowds  of  specks  upon  the  ocean 
we  feel  that  this  sort  of  thing  has  been  going  on  for 
centuries  and  that  the  earliest  foreigner  to  approach 
these  shores  must  have  been  equally  touched  .as  our- 
selves on  our  first  contact  with  these  hardy  inhabitants 
of  the  Black  Continent. 


ch.  xi  OLOKUN  OLOSA  AND  FISHERMAN 


107 

Barbot  evidently  took  a great  interest  in  fishing  and 
fish  as  connected  with  the  natives  of  the  Gold  Coast, 
and  in  his  Description  of  the  Coast  of  South  Guinea 
writes  : 

“ At  my  first  voyage,  whilst  we  lay  before 
Conimendo,  some  fishermen,  near  our  ship,  took  a fish 
about  seven  feet  long.  . . . The  Blacks  call  itFetisso, 
but  for  what  reason  I cannot  determine  unless  it  be  to 
express  that  it  is  too  rare  and  sweet  for  mortals  to  eat 
and  only  fit  for  a deity.  ...  As  I remember  the 
Blacks  would  not  sell  it  but  only  allowed  me  the 
liberty  of  drawing  its  figure.  ...  I am  apt  to  believe 
the  Blacks  look  upon  this  fish  as  a sort  of  Deity  ; 
though  I did  not  hear  they  paid  it  any  religious 
worship.  If  they  do,  there  is  nothing  new  in  paying 
adoration  to  a fish  ; for  the  Philistines  in  the  first  ages 
of  the  world  adored  Dagon,  which  was  an  idol  half  man 
half  fish  : the  word  Dagon  in  their  language  signify- 
ing a fish  : and  that  those  Gentiles  looked  upon  as  the 
great  god,  Judges  xvi.,  23.  ‘ Dagon  our  God  hath 
delivered  Samson  our  enemy  into  our  hand.’  Dagon 
represented  Neptune  the  God  of  the  Sea  and  by  him 
perhaps  was  meant  Noah.  The  Syrians  according  to 
Cicero  and  Xenophon,  adored  some  large  tame  fish, 
kept  in  the  river  Chalus,  and  would  not  suffer  any 
person  to  go  about  to  disturb  them.  The  Syro- 
Phoenicians  according  to  Clemens  Alexandrinus,  adored 
those  fishes  with  as  much  zeal,  as  the  Elians  worshipped 
Jupiter:  and  Diodorus  Siculus  affirms  the  Syrians  did 
not  eat  fish  but  adored  them  as  gods.  Plutarch 
mentions  the  Oxindrites  and  Cynophites,  Egyptian 


io8 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


nations  which  having  been  long  at  war  about  killing  a 
fish  they  esteemed  sacred,  were  so  weakened,  that  the 
Romans  subdued  and  made  them  slaves.” 

One  feels  inclined,  after  reading  this,  to  exclaim 
“ Dear  old  Barbot  ; ” for  we  can  so  fully  enter  into  the 
spirit  which  seems  to  have  permeated  the  minds  of  the 
great  African  traders  of  olden  days,  and  which,  in  spite 
of  the  rush  of  this  day  of  steamships  and  railways,  still 
influences  so  many  of  us. 

--  The  Kings  of  Benin  had  to  be  supported  under 
each  arm  by  two  chiefs  whenever  they  attempted  to 
walk  because  they  claimed  to  be  descended  from  such 
a deity  as  mentioned  by  Barbot  (see  plate  XVII. 
Antiquities  from  Benin  in  the  British  Museum),  and 
by  way  of  proof  they  say  that  one  of  their  Kings 
“ Ehenbuda  ” by  name  was  born  with  legs  with  no 
bones  in  them.  Perhaps  in  reference  to  this  myth  the 
late  Mary  Kingsley  wrote:  “The  manners  and 
customs  of  many  West  African  fishes  are  quaint.  I 
have  never  yet  seen  that  fish  the  natives  often  tell  me 
about  that  is  as  big  as  a man  only  thicker,  and  which 
walks  about  on  its  fins  at  night  in  the  forest,  so  I 
cannot  vouch  for  it.” 

When  in  due  course  we  land  on  the  beach  in  Africa 
we  find  fishing  is  of  a more  sociable  nature,  for  here 
we  see  numbers  of  men  and  boys  launching  their  great 
nets  in  canoes  and  casting  them  into  the  sea  four  or 
five  hundred  yards  away  on  the  far  side  of  the  surf. 
Having  left  the  end  of  a grass  rope,  attached  to  one 
end  of  the  net,  in  the  hand  of  a small  boy,  on  the 
beach,  the  fisherman  in  the  canoe  after  discharging  the 


XI 


OLOKUN  OLOSA  AND  FISHERMAN 


109 

net  brings  in  the  rope  tied  to  the  other  end  with  all 
possible  speed.  As  the  canoe  rushes  merrily  through 
the  surf  and  almost  before  it  grates  upon  the  sandy 
beach  willing  hands  seize  the  rope,  and,  together  with 
those  who  have  now  gone  to  the  help  of  the  small 
boy,  begin  to  haul  the  net  and  its  contents  to  the 
land. 

A fishing  beach  is  not  a pleasant  place  to  walk 
about  on,  unless  the  sea  breeze  is  strong  enough  to 
blow  the  stench  of  half  cured  fish  away  from  you. 
Barbot’s  words  of  nearly  150  years  ago  may  be  said  to 
still  stand  good  in  many  places  where  he  writes  (page 
42,  “ Description  of  the  Coast  of  Nigritia  ”) : “ It  is  very 
unaccountable  that  these  people,  having  such  plenty  of 
several  sorts  of  large  fish,  will  not  dress  it  while  fresh 
and  sweet,  but  let  it  lie  buried  along  the  shore ; 
especially  the  pilchards,  as  I suppose  to  give  it  a 
better  relish  or  else  that  it  may  keep  longer.  In  short, 
whether  this  be  any  particular  fancy  of  theirs  or  that 
the  continual  violent  heat  immediately  corrupts  it,  this 
is  certain,  that  they  eat  none  but  what  stinks,  and 
account  it  the  greater  dainty.  To  instance  somewhat 
more  particularly,  as  to  pilchards,  they  only  let  them 
lie  some  days  buried  in  the  wet  briny  sand  along  the 
shore,  and  perhaps  it  may  be  on  account  of  its  saltness  ; 
but  afterwards  dig  up  and  expose  them  to  the  sun  for 
some  time  to  dry  ; and  then  lay  them  up  in  their  huts 
which  are  all  the  day  like  stoves  ; and  thus  they  daily 
eat  and  sell  them  to  the  inland  blacks  who  come  down 
to  buy  them,  to  supply  the  country  markets.  I have 
seen  whole  cabins  or  cottages  full  of  these  dry  pilchards 


I 10 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


at  Rusisco,  and  the  sand  down  before  it  next  the  sea 
so  stored  that  there  was  an  intolerable  stench  about 
the  place.” 

The  great  sea  Orisha  of  the  Yoruba  people  is  called 
“ Olokun.”  The  Benin  river  is  called  after  him  and 
the  Bini  say  that  he  married  when  poor  the  spirit 
of  the  river  Oha  which  runs  into  the  Olokun  near  its 
mouth. 

His  second  and  favourite  wife,  however,  was  the 
Sapoba  river  called  by  the  natives  Igbagon  (see  At 
the  Back  of  the  Black  Mans  Mind). 

The  Lagos  people  who  were  governed  by  chiefs 
crowned  by  the  Oba  of  Benin,  say  that  Olokun 
married  Olokunsu  or  Elusu  who  lives  in  the  harbour 
at  Lagos.  She  is  white  in  colour  and  human  in  shape, 
but  is  covered  with  fish  scales  from  below  the  breasts 
to  the  hips.  The  fish  in  the  waters  of  the  bar  are 
sacred  to  her,  and  should  anyone  catch  them  she  takes 
vengeance  by  upsetting  canoes  and  drowning  the 
occupants.  (See  Ellis,  The  Yoruba-speaking  People). 

When  the  sea  is  rough  and  the  people  cannot  fish 
they  say  Olokun  is  angry.  In  the  olden  days  the 
people  would  then  sacrifice  a human  being  to  appease 
his  wrath  and  so  be  able  to  fish,  but  as  a rule  his 
wrath  seems  to  have  been  calmed  by  offerings  of 
animals  and  foodstuff. 

In  Bishop  Phillips’  If  a Odu  No.  3 Ejiogbe,  the 
Oracle  is  made  to  say  : “ All  the  honours  of  the  waters 
upon  earth  cannot  be  as  great  as  the  honour  of  the 
sea.  All  the  rivers  that  have  their  source  above  are 
not  so  beautiful  as  the  Lagoon.” 


XI 


OLOKUN  OLOSA  AND  FISHERMAN 


r 1 1 


The  sea  Olokun  is  said  to  be  in  the  first  place  the 
Lagoon  Olosa  in  the  second  as  Orisha. 

Many  kinds  of  nets  and  traps  are  used  by  the 
fishermen  in  the  Lagoons  in  Africa  and  it  is  a pretty 
sight  on  a bright  day  to  watch  the  busy  fishermen  at 
work,  some  in  canoes  patiently  fishing  with  hooks, 
some  throwing  a round  shaped  net,  an  importation 
from  Accra,  some  busy  arranging  their  traps,  and 
others  on  the  beach  dragging  the  shallows  for  small 
fish  and  prawns. 

Olosa  the  Orisha  of  the  Lagoons  looms  large  in  the 
mind  of  the  pagan  fisherman  and  when  floods  prevent 
his  operations  he  concludes  that  she  is  annoyed  and 
offers  some  sacrifice  at  one  or  other  of  the  many  altars 
erected  in  her  honour  along  the  banks  of  the  Lagoon. 
Human  sacrifices,  it  is  said,  used  to  be  offered  to  her, 
but  she  is  now  satisfied  with  animals  and  vegetable 
products. 

Crocodiles  are  her  messengers  and  Ellis  tells  us 
“ Food  is  regularly  supplied  to  these  reptiles  every 
fifth 1 day,  or  festival,  and  many  of  them  become 
sufficiently  tame  to  come  for  the  offering  as  soon  as 
they  see  or  hear  the  worshippers  gathering  on  the  bank.” 

But  leaving  the  Lagoons  and  entering  the  man- 
grove banked  rivers  everyone  will  have  noticed  the 
shy  fisherman  in  his  tiny  canoe  perhaps  spearing  fish 
and  have  passed  his  wife  carrying  her  baby  on  her 
back  just  as  she  wildly  steers  her  canoe  out  of  your 
sight  up  some  tiny  creek. 

These  fishermen  live  in  small  bamboo  huts  some- 

1 The  5th  day  is  the  first  day  of  a new  week  and  is  Odudua’s  day. 


1 12 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


times  built  on  piles  in  a surrounding  swamp  and  some- 
times on  the  sandy  bank  of  a river  in  the  midst  of  a 
sea  of  grass.  A solitary  lonely  life  it  must  be. 

And  now  we  come  to  where  the  river  passes  through 
country  more  or  less  cultivated  and  governed  by  some 
responsible  chief,  and  we  find  that  certain  fishermen 
have  fishing  rights  along  specified  reaches  of  the  river 
with  a number  of  fishermen  under  them. 

In  this  district  (Olokemeji)  this  head  fisherman  is 
called  “ Baba  Olodu,”  Father  or  owner  of  the  river. 
All  fishermen  under  him  are  supposed  to  give  him  part 
of  their  catch,  and  he  in  turn  is  supposed  to  give  the 
Alake  of  Abeokuta,  in  whose  Kingdom  we  live,  a 
certain  quantity  or  its  equivalent  every  year.  There 
are  two  such  Baba  Olodu  near  to  Olokemeji,  Akitunde 
and  Idowu  by  name,  and  it  is  from  them  that  I have 
obtained  the  following  notes. 

Anyone  may  fish,  but  if  a stranger  fishes  he  is 
supposed  to  give  the  Baba  of  the  district  part  of  his 
catch.  They  have  four  kinds  of  traps  : — 

1.  The  Kolu,  a net-like  trap  made  of  the  tie-tie  or 
native  rope  or  string  known  as  Agba.  When  the  fish 
enter  this  trap  the  float  above  is  pressed  down. 

2.  Ogun  called  Owa,  a trap  made  up  of  the  leaves  of 
the  palm  tree  which  is  used  in  both  large  and  small 
streams  and  is  left  in  them  all  night  and  examined  in 
the  morning. 

3.  Koko,  a trap  made  of  Agba  and  placed  in  large 
and  deep  rivers.  A string  is  tied  to  the  trap  and  fast- 
ened to  a shrub  on  the  river  bank,  and  when  the  shrub 
shakes  they  know  a fish  is  in  the  trap. 


XX 


OLOKUN  OLOSA  AND  FISHERMAN 


”3 

4.  Agbagba,  a trap  made  of  Egburo  or  Awkaw  tie-tie. 
This  is  for  shallow  rivers  and  is  placed  between  rocks 
with  its  mouth  just  above  the  level  of  the  water,  and 
fish  coming  over  the  fall  drop  into  it. 

Before  the  fisherman  starts  to  fish  he  gets  a pod  of 
pepper,  atare,  and  places  it  in  a hole  on  the  bank  of  the 
river,  he  then  puts  seven  grains  of  corn  on  the  top  of 
this.  This  is  to  secure  good  luck.  If  his  catch  has 
been  a success  the  fisherman  makes  a thank-offering  to 
Yemaja  or  Yemoja,  the  mother  of  Olokun  and  Olosa. 
He  fills  a pot  with  cooked  maize  and  on  the  top  of  it 
places  seven  kola  nuts.  He  then  pours  palm  wine,  or 
corn  beer,  or  gin  over  the  whole  and  puts  it  into  the 
river.  Yemaja  is  said  to  carry  this  offering  to  her 
offspring. 

In  going  to  fish  if  he  stumbles  and  strikes  his  right 
foot  no  matter,  but  striking  his  left  foot  means  bad  luck. 
This  sign  is  called  Akilo. 

When  the  bird  Kowe  crys  or  sings  Krrr  it  is  a good 
sign,  but  if  it  is  silent  it  is  looked  upon  as  a bad 
sign. 

Another  man  will  know  his  luck  by  the  quivering  of 
his  eyelid.  The  quivering  of  the  left  eye-lid  is  a sign 
of  a death  in  his  family. 

The  time  for  fishing  in  the  interior  is  the  dry  season 
and  best  just  when  the  rains  cease  and  the  rivers  begin 
to  fall. 

Although  fishermen  have  in  this  district  their  head 
man  or  Baba  Olodu,  they  have  no  guild  or  secret 
society  like  the  hunters.  (See  next  chapter.) 

When  a fish  black  in  colour,  with  two  horns  in  its 


1 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


114 

head,  called  Aro  (the  owner  of  the  river)  is  caught, 
it  is  quickly  returned  to  the  river.  (This  is,  perhaps, 
the  copper  fish  ( Ostracion  quadricornis).  Its  young, 
however,  may  be  killed.  Then  the  Abori,  fish  with 
one  horn,  are  sacred  to  Yemoja. 

They  do  not  like  catching  the  Ojiji  [Malopterurtis 
electricus ),  as  they  say,  when  large,  they  can  kill  a 
person;  and  the  Adede,  called  “ Owoternu  ” by  the 
Lagos  people,  does  not  please  them,  as  they  say  that 
when  full  he  turns  the  waters  black. 

This  life  of  the  fisherman  is  perhaps  the  most 
simple  and  wanting,  from  its  solitariness,  perhaps,  in 
organisation.  We  are,  perhaps,  nearer  to  what  we 
may  imagine  primitive  life  to  have  been  in  this  study 
of  the  life  of  an  African  fisherman  than  in  any  other. 
But  primitive  as  it  may  be,  the  fisherman  thanks  his 
god,  Yemoja,  for  his  good  luck,  and  knows  that  sin, 
such  as  theft  or  adultery,  is  hurtful  to  his  luck. 

A Flood  Story . 

(According  to  Ellis,  page  64.)  Sometime  after 
settling  at  Ado,  I fa  became  tired  of  living  in  the 
world,  and  accordingly  went  to  dwell  in  the  firmament 
with  Obatala.  After  his  departure,  mankind,  deprived 
of  his  assistance,  was  unable  properly  to  interpret  the 
desire  of  the  Gods,  most  of  whom  became  annoyed 
in  consequence.  Olokun  was  most  angry,  and  in  a 
fit  of  rage  he  destroyed  nearly  all  the  inhabitants  of 
the  world  in  a great  flood,  only  a few  being  saved  by 
Obatala,  who  drew  them  up  into  the  sky  by  means  of 


XI  OLOKUN  OLOSA  AND  FISHERMAN  1 15 

a long  iron  chain.  After  this  ebullition  of  anger, 
Olokun  retired  once  more  to  his  own  domains,  but 
the  world  was  nothing  but  mud,  and  quite  unfit  to 
live  in,  till  I fa  came  down  from  the  sky,  and,  in 
connection  with  Odudua,  once  more  made  it  habitable. 

Thus  are  Olokun  and  Olosa  the  first  offspring  of 
Yemoja  and  Orungan  connected  with  the  category 
“ water  ” and  the  occupation  of  the  fisherman. 


1 2 


CHAPTER  XII 

OGUN,  OSHOWSI,  AND  THE  HUNTER 

One  catches  glimpses  of  the  rule  by  father  form  of 
Government  in  Africa  in  a fisherman’s  or  hunter’s 
camp,  often  a long  distance  from  any  village,  they  live 
solitary  camp-like  lives.  The  fisherman’s  life  we  have 
described  ; the  hunter  smokes  and  dries  the  product  of 
the  chase  and  exchanges  this  for  other  necessaries  of 
life  in  the  nearest  market.  He  is  more  or  less 
governed  by  his  senses  and  his  desires,  but  he  believes 
thoroughly  in  his  Orisha  “Ogun.”  He  accumulates  a 
certain  amount  of  goods  and  as  he  desires  to  marry  he 
invests  his  capital  in  obtaining  a wife.  They  have 
children  and  the  result  is  a hunters’  village.  Other 
hunters  ask  his  permission  to  share  his  hunting-grounds 
and  on  certain  conditions  he  allows  them  to  do  so. 
These  hunters  in  all  probability  marry  the  head 
hunter’s  daughters. 

The  men  hunt  and  the  women  do  the  marketing  and 
cook  for  their  husbands.  Men  living  in  the  wilds  of 
Africa  facing  death  in  numerous  ways  become  what 
some  people  call  superstitious  and  others  religious. 

This  may  account  for  the  fact  that  most  of  the  old 

116 


ch.  xii  OGUN,  OSHOWSI,  AND  THE  HUNTER  117 

Coasters,  though  they  were  not  credited  with  leading  a 
religious  life  but  rather  a kind  of  unlicensed  patri- 
archal one,  were  generally  found  to  be  believers 
in  their  Bible  and  could  always  produce  one  when 
needed. 

Now  the  hunters  in  Africa  are  nearly  all  thorough  be- 
lievers in  their  Orishas,  and  before  going  out  on  their 
expeditions  in  Yorubaland  they  offer  kola  nuts  to  the 
Orishas  Eshu,  Ogun  and  Oshowsi.  Their  great  time 
for  hunting  is  when  the  grass  has  been  burnt  and  it  is 
then  that  the  greater  sacrifices  are  offered.  In  the 
district  of  Olokemeji  no  human  sacrifices  were  offered 
to  Ogun,  so  Agbola’s  son  told  me,  but,  he  added, 
in  other  districts  human  beings  used  to  be  killed.  He 
said  that  when  a hunter  goes  out  he  sacrifices  to  the 
three  above-named  Orishas  ; they  kill  a cock  giving 
Eshu  a dash  of  its  blood,  and  then  leave  it  at  the  foot 
of  Ogun’s  altar.  After  a while  they  come  back  and 
take  the  bloodless  body  of  the  cock  away  and  eat  it, 
they  also  give  Ogun  kola.  To  Oshowsi  they  give 
roasted  beans,  and  just  before  leaving  on  a small  hunt  a 
hunter  throws  pieces  of  a kola  nut  into  the  air  and  as  the 
pieces  fall  upon  the  earth,  so  he  knows  he  will  have 
good  or  bad  luck. 

A second  good  point  about  the  hunter  is  respect 
for  the  head  hunter  and  obedience  to  his  commands. 
Having  rubbed  his  body  all  over  with  soap  mixed  with 
some  powder,  and  placed  chalk  marks  on  his  head  so 
that  animals  shall  not  smell  him,  he  presents  himself 
before  the  head  hunter  and  tells  him  where  he  is  going 
to  hunt,  so  that  there  may  be  no  overlapping.  Should 


1 1 8 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


one  hunter  meet  another  on  his  way  he  salutes  him 
and  walks  on  in  silence,  and  should  he  omit  to  tell  the 
head  hunter  where  he  is  going  to  hunt,  or  then  shoot 
somewhere  else  than  in  the  appointed  place,  the  head 
hunter  will  take  his  gun  and  money  from  him  and  cast 
him  out  of  the  camp. 

If  one  hunter  tries  to  poison  another  he  will  meet 
with  no  luck. 

If  he  commits  adultery  he  will  have  no  luck,  and  if 
while  away  hunting  his  wife  commits  adultery  he  will 
see  a male  and  female  animal  copulating.  If  he  loves 
his  wife  he  dare  not  shoot  either  of  these  creatures, 
since,  if  he  killed  them,  his  wife  would  die.  So  he  goes 
back  at  once  to  his  town  and  taking  his  wife  before 
Ogun’s  altar  accuses  her  of  the  sin.  If  she  admits  her 
guilt,  the  adulterer  is  fined  one  dog  to  be  sacrificed  to 
Ogun,  one  goat  for  I fa,  and  three  bags  of  cowries  to- 
gether with  kola  for  the  husband.  But  if  she  denies 
it  they  ask  her  to  take  some  of  the  kola  from  Ogun’s 
altar,  and  if  she  eats  the  kola  (being  guilty)  Ogun  in 
two  or  three  days  (unless  she  confesses)  will  kill  her. 
Sometimes  a ram  will  run  after  her  and  butt  her  to 
death. 

And  when  the  hunter  cannot  kill  anything  and  he 
hears  the  nightjar  crying  in  the  day  he  knows  some- 
thing has  happened  in  his  town  and  he  returns  to  Ogun 
knowing  that  some  relation  is  dead  or  very  ill.  Or 
when  the  bird  that  cries  “ Ko  ! we  ! ” and  then  “ tche  ! 
tche ! ” cries  “ Ko  ! we!  ” three  times  without  adding 
“ tche  ! tche ! ” he  knows  someone  is  dead. 

But  supposing  a man  has  had  a woman  illicitly,  he 


MiM 


>v 


v <<WA' 


Agbolo’s  Sons. 


Great  Native  Hunters. 


[ Face  p.  i iq. 


XII  OGUN,  OSHOWSI,  AND  THE  HUNTER  119 

takes  a big  snail,  some  shea  butter  and  the  leaves  of 
the  Odudun,  Tete  and  Renren,  and  pounding  all 
together  (after  first  sacrificing  to  Ogun),  smears  his 
whole  body  with  the  mixture  and  goes  his  way 
rejoicing  knowing  that  all  is  well. 

Should  a hunter  happen  to  kill  an  animal  that  is 
pregnant  he  makes  an  offering  of  one  dog,  palm  oil, 
and  kola  to  Ogun. 

If  a hunter  tells  a lie  he  will  kill  nothing,  and  if  two 
hunters  have  gone  before  Ogun  and  sworn  to  keep  a 
thing  secret,  and  one  then  goes  and  reveals  it,  some 
animal  will  fight  with  him  and  may  kill  him. 

And  when  a hunter  knows  that  he  has  not  com- 
mitted any  of  these  crimes,  and  still  has  bad  luck,  then 
he  knows  that  Ogun  wants  a present. 

I have  often  had  to  spend  the  night  in  one  or  other 
of  these  primitive  fishermen’s  and  hunters’  villages, 
and  in  the  morning  when  I have  asked  to  see  the 
“ Father  ” to  say  good-bye  to  him  I have  been  told 
that  I must  wait  if  I wish  to  see  him  as  he  has 
gone  to  the  grove  sacred  to  Ogun,  to  pray  for  his 
people. 

And  so  the  hunter  believes  in  his  Orisha  and  obeys 
his  father’s  will  and  knows  that  he  will  be  punished  for 
any  offences  against  the  divine  and  human  father’s 
will. 

Agbola’s  son  told  me  that  there  are  strong  beasts 
in  the  bush  such  as  leopards,  elephants,  lions, 
chimpanzees,  unicorns  (?),  bush  cows,  etc.,  and  that 
when  a hunter  shoots  at  one  of  these  he  immediately 
sprinkles  a medicine  called  Kaji  in  front  of  him  in  the 


120 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


direction  of  the  animal  so  that  it  will  not  get  up  and 
charge  him. 

Hunters,  he  said,  do  not  believe  that  men  can 
turn  themselves  into  leopards,  but  they  do  believe 
that  certain  people  called  Ologun  have  the  power  to 
influence  these  beasts  and  so  cause  them  to  kill 
people.  Hunters  protect  themselves  against  this  risk 
by  buying  and  wearing  a belt  with  medicine  in  it 
called  Ishora.  Their  ancestors  gave  them  the  pre- 
scription according  to  which  these  belts  are  made. 

The  leopard  in  this  country  is  known  by  the  names 
Ekun,  the  fearless  one,  Ogida  the  one  ready  to  scratch, 
and  Jakumu  the  striker.  An  Ibadan  hunter  told  me 
that  the  leopard  represents  the  land,  and  that  the 
Alafin  alone  could  call  himself  “the  Leopard,”  be- 
cause he  inherited  all  the  land  from  the  first  Oni  of  Ife. 

The  Alafin’s  warriors,  called  Kakamfu,  who,  by  the 
way,  number  201  1 (the  original  number  of  Yoruba 
Orishas,  or  rather  the  number  said  by  the  priests  of 
I fa  to  have  been  in  the  right  hand  division),  used 
to  wear  an  apron  of  the  leopard’s  skin. 

When  the  leopard  was  killed  its  face  was  covered 
with  a cloth  (a  custom  they  have  in  common  with  the 
Bavili)  because,  as  the  hunter  said,  it  is  a king.  The 
king  is  not  supposed  to  look  anyone  in  the  face  for 
fear  of  frightening  him. 

The  Leopard  king,  or  Alafin,  is  known  by  his 
crown  of  blue  beads,  six  marks  on  each  cheek, 
Orania’s  sword  (Ida  orania),  and  a calabash  wrapped 
in  cloth  called  (Ibayiwa),  a stick  covered  with  beads 

I The  Yoruba  heathenism,  At  the  Back  of  the  Black  Man's  Mind , 


XII  OGUN,  OSHOWSI,  AND  THE  HUNTER  121 

called  Okpaleki,  and  he  does  not  wear  a necklace, 
whereas  his  chiefs  do. 

Elephant- hunting  regulations  in  the  Benin  Kingdom. 

The  hunter  wants  to  kill  an  elephant. 

1.  He  goes  to  the  King  and  asks  permission. 

2.  The  King  gives  him  a boy. 

3.  The  boy  stops  in  the  village,  the  hunter  goes 
into  the  bush. 

4.  When  he  kills  the  elephant  he  comes  and  tells 
the  King’s  boy  what  he  has  done. 

5.  The  hunter  then  returns  to  cut  up  the  elephant. 

6.  The  leg  nearest  the  ground  when  the  elephant 
falls  is  for  the  King. 

7.  The  fore  leg  belongs  to  the  village  landowner. 

8.  The  neck  belongs  to  the  hunter’s  wife. 

9.  The  back  round  about  the  kidneys  is  for  the 
King’s  mother,  Iyoba. 

10.  The  upper  fore  leg  to  the  hunter’s  boy. 

1 1.  The  upper  hind  leg  to  the  hunter. 

12.  The  head  belongs  to  the  village  boys  who 
accompany  the  hunter. 

13.  The  two  tusks  and  the  King’s  leg  are  given 
to  the  King’s  boy. 

14.  Some  of  the  meat  that  is  over  is  given  to  the 
King’s  boy. 

15.  The  hunter  and  the  King’s  boy  take  the  leg 
and  tusks  to  Benin  city. 

16.  The  village  paramount  chief  takes  them  to  the 
King. 

17.  The  King  then  takes  one  tusk  and  gives  one  to 
the  hunter. 


122 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


1 8.  The  hunter  next  states  that  he  has  no  wife,  the 
King  then  may  give  him  a woman  or  not,  just  as  he 
thinks  well  or  not  of  the  hunter. 

One  of  the  causes  that  influenced  the  King  was 
whether  the  hunter  always  killed  the  large  elephants 
and  left  the  small  ones. 

The  King  kept  his  tusk  either  as  a juju,  or  for  a 
future  present  to  a white  man  or  some  foreign  chief 
who  visited  him. 

Should  a hunter  kill  an  elephant  without  permission 
he  would  be  arrested  and  fined. 

“ Obodo,  Adji,  and  Oluku  and  others  shot  an  elephant 
without  a license  at  Ubogwi.  They  refused  to  come 
in,  so  the  King  sent  Ogiromeci  with  plenty  of  boys 
to  arrest  them  ; one  fought  and  escaped. 

“When  they  came  the  King  accused  them  of  killing 
an  elephant,  and  as  a punishment  sent  some  of 
them  to  Igwihollo  and  some  to  lgwinigbo  to  hunt 
elephants  for  him,  and  kept  them  there  for  three 
years. 

“ When  the  hunter  (stranger)  came  he  generally 
brought  a present  for  the  King,  but  before  he  could  go 
before  the  King  he  had  to  ‘ dash  ’ (make  a present  to) 
the  paramount  chief.” 

Hunters  in  Yorubaland  have  societies  or  guilds,  and 
they  appear  to  be  of  two  kinds,  the  Egbe  Omode  an 
ordinary  hunter’s  society,  and  the  Egbe  Oluri  Ode 
which  has  its  headquarters  at  Abeokuta. 

Ogbolo  of  Olokemeji  was  one  of  the  four  great 
officers  of  the  “ Egbe  Olori  Ode,”  the  other  three 
residing  in  Abeokuta,  The  titles  of  the  four  are  : — 


XII  OGUN,  OSHOWSI,  AND  THE  HUNTER  123 

1.  Oyeshile,  meaning  the  throne  is  vacant. 

2.  Bi  eyi  oku,  If  this  is  not  dead. 

3.  Ojo,  The  afterbirth  sticks  to  his  head. 

4.  Ogbolo,  meaning  near  the  Ogun. 

Their  council  is  formed  of  six  hunters  and  six  assist- 
ants. Thus  it  would  seem  that  the  hunters  with  their 
great  Orishas,  Ogun  and  Oshowsi,  have  an  “ Ogboni  ” 
on  earth,  the  members  of  which,  we  may  presume, 
have  their  Orishas  in  heaven. 

Ogbolo’s  son  told  me  that  the  name  of  the  first  great 
hunter  was  Akoka,  but  that  the  Orisha  Ogun  first 
directed  men  to  start  hunting.  He  pointed  out  to  them 
also  his  sacred  trees,  the  Peregun,  Akoko  and  Atori  : 
and  made  them  dig  four  holes  and  plant  four  sticks  to 
uphold  a kind  of  altar  or  shelf,  upon  which  they  place 
the  heads  of  all  animals  they  kill  and  where  they  also 
sacrifice  dogs  to  Ogun. 

Ogun  after  Shango  and  I fa  is  perhaps  the  best 
known  or  most  popular  Orisha  in  Yorubaland,  and  this 
probably  arises  from  the  fact  that  in  almost  every  village 
there  is  a hunter  or  a number  of  them. 

One  hears  Ogun’s  name  constantly  and  he  appears  to 
be  the  owner  of  some  very  potent  medicine.  As  Ellis 
says,  “ Any  piece  of  iron  can  be  used  as  a symbol  of 
Ogun  and  the  ground  is  sacred  to  him  because  iron  ore 
is  found  in  it.”  On  a visit  to  the  Asehin  of  Isehin  I was 
taken  through  various  courts  to  the  court  where  he 
holds  his  palavers.  I was  astonished  to  find  goats, 
sheep,  and  women  here,  quite  contrary  to  custom,  and 
the  place  was  filthy.  Across  this  court  from  north  to 


124 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


south  an  iron  chain  was  tightly  stretched  and  pegged 
down.  Near  the  middle  of  this  line  was  a stone  newly 
covered  with  the  blood  of  a dog  that  had  been  sacri- 
ficed. I asked  what  it  meant  and  was  told  by  the 
Asehin  that  it  was  Ogun  medicine. 

In  the  palace  yard  at  Akure  and  also  in  one  of  the 
streets  there  are  mounds  of  mud  about  three  feet  high 
on  the  top  of  which  lie  large  flat  slabs  of  wood  and 
these  they  call  Isi  Ogun.  They  are  sacrificial  tables 
where  dogs  are,  and  at  times  human  beings  were 
sacrificed. 

Ibegun , which  is  the  name  of  the  dog  sacrificed,  is  also 
worshipped  at  Akure.  It  is  strange  how  the  compan- 
ions of  the  Orishas  are  sometimes  talked  of  as  wives, 
sometimes  as  brothers.  The  following  story  given  to 
me  by  Asani  an  Egba  describes  Ogun  and  Oshowsi  as 
brothers. 


Oshowsi. 

Oshowsi  and  Ogun  are  two  brothers,  and  when 
they  were  young  they  were  very  wicked,  and  were 
driven  away  from  their  home  by  Jakuta  because  they 
refused  to  acknowledge  his  authority.  They  became 
great  hunters.  The  natives  say  that  Oshowsi  is 
Ogun’s  wife,  but  this  is  not  so,  they  were  both  the 
sons  of  one  father.  Oshowsi  used  to  go  ahead  and 
Ogun  followed.  Oshowsi’s  real  name  is  Olu  fu  si, 
Ogun’s  other  name  was  Ija,  he  that  beats  and  fights 
the  game  that  Oshowsi  points  out  to  him.  Oshu 


xir  OGUN,  OSHOWSI,  AND  THE  HUNTER  125 

osi 1 was  a left-handed  man.  In  this  case  Ogun  and 
Oshowsi  are  connected  with  the  category  Earth  and 
the  occupation  of  hunting. 

Ogun  and  the  Blacksmith. 

From  the  fact  that  the  blacksmith  has  the  same 
Orishas  as  the  hunter  it  may  perhaps  be  presumed  that 
the  necessities  of  the  calling  of  the  hunter  have,  at 
a much  later  period,  brought  his  occupation  into 
existence. 

He  is  an  industrious  and  interesting  person,  and 
does  not  like  you  to  ignore  him  as  you  pass  his 
smithy.  Tang,  tang,  tang,  strikes  his  hammer  on  his 
anvil  as  you  approach,  as  if  to  say,  “ Here  I am,  a 
cheery  good  day  to  you  ! ” and  so  you  are  invited  to 
go  up  to  him  and  return  his  salute. 

The  mysteries  of  heat  and  cold,  and  light  and  dark- 
ness have  been  revealed  to  him.  He  cannot,  it  is 
true,  explain  them  in  words  to  you,  for  to  him  each 
process  is  a mystery,  and  his  language  is  still  a poor 
one  from  the  European’s  standpoint. 

But  he  has  observed,  and  the  knowledge  is  his. 
See  how  the  metal  expands  as  it  gets  red  hot 
and  contracts  as  it  gets  cold,  and  how,  when  he 
thrusts  the  heated  metal  into  water,  evaporation  and 
condensation  take  place.  He  has  seen  all  this  a 
hundred  times.  Again,  heat  dissolves  and  melts,  and 
cold  consolidates  and  solidifies.  He  notes  this  daily. 
Divided  or  broken  bits  of  iron  by  heat  and  cold  be- 


1 Oshu  osi  is  contracted  into  Oshowsi. 


126 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


chap. 


come  fused  and  conjoined  and  made  hard.  He 
watches  the  ebullition  of  the  molten  mass  which,  as  it 
cools,  subsides  and  passes  from  motion  to  rest.  Activity, 
inertness,  energy,  pressure,  sensation,  numbness,  light 
and  darkness,  are  wonders  that  impress  themselves 
upon  his  receptive  mind  as  he  day  by  day  manufac- 
tures his  hoes,  knives,  spear  heads,  and  what  not.  It 
will  not  surprise  us  at  a later  period  if  we  find  in  the 
philosophy  of  the  Blackman  an  Orisha  for  each  of 
these  phases  in  a natural  process. 

After  reading  Barbot’s  account  of  the  blacksmiths  of 
his  day  in  a description  of  the  Coast  of  North  Guinea  it 
is  pleasant  to  turn  to  Mr.  C.  V.  Bellamy’s  sympathetic 
account  of  “A  West  African  Smelting  House.”  I 
cannot  help  quoting  largely  from  this  very  interesting 
paper : 

“ Not  far  from  Oyo,  not  more  than  three  days’ 
journey  from  the  coast,  there  is  a small  village  whose 
inhabitants  have  been  engaged  in  the  extraction  of 
iron  for  generations  past,  and  where  the  methods 
are  the  same  probably  as  those  practised  by  the 

earliest  workers  in  this  metal They  are 

simple  and  unsophisticated,  but  they  practise  an  art 
which  is  unknown  to  the  savage  and  which  places 
them  high  above  him  in  the  social  scale,  while  it 
entitles  them  to  be  considered  to  have  reached  a 
higher  degree  of  civilisation  than  many  of  the  tribes 
met  with  in  European  countries  where  the  people 
have  been  looked  upon  as  domesticated. 

“ The  shale  is  excavated  with  the  aid  of  a rude 
pick  in  pieces  weighing  from  three  to  five  pounds, 
and  is  carried  to  the  works  for  treatment. 


XII  OGUN,  OSHOWSI,  AND  THE  HUNTER  127 

“ They  first  roast  it  over  a fire  of  green 
timber ; this  is  done  during  the  night ; the  next 
morning  it  is  pounded  in  a mortar.  The  poundings 
are  screened  until  there  is  nothing  remaining  in  the 
mortar,  the  sieve  consisting  of  a native  made  basket 
rather  openly  woven,  and  they  are  then  borne  away 
to  the  river  side  for  the  purpose  of  washing  or 
panning  ....  The  washed  ore  is  conveyed  to  the 
smelting  house  and  poured  into  the  kiln  as  occasion 
may  require,  in  a damp  state.” 

For  a description  of  the  smelting  house,  the  arrange- 
ment of  the  shed,  and  the  cupola,  etc.,  I must  refer  you 
to  Mr.  Bellamy’s  paper.1 

“ Probably  the  most  remarkable  feature  in  the 
whole  of  the  process  is  the  use  of  selected  clinker 
for  a flux.  This  may  throw  light  upon  what  is  now 
frequently  a matter  of  doubt,  namely,  the  medium 
employed  by  the  ancients  in  their  smelting  opera- 
tions. 

“ The  pig  iron,  after  it  has  cooled  down  sufficiently, 
is  broken  up  into  convenient  lumps  for  the  purpose 
of  sale  or  barter.”  This  pig  iron  is  sold  to  the 
blacksmiths  whose  work  Mr.  Bellamy  describes. 

“ The  bellows  consisted  of  a pair  of  circular 
wooden  bowls  about  a foot  in  diameter,  connected 
by  an  air  passage  constructed  of  the  same,  from 
which  two  wooden  pipes  to  do  duty  for  the  tue-iron 
lead  to  the  earth ; over  the  top  of  each  bowl  is 
loosely  secured  an  undressed  goatskin,  to  which  is 
fastened  in  the  centre  of  the  bowl  a long  bamboo 
rod,  one  of  which  is  held  in  each  hand. 

1 To  be  found  in  the  Royal  Colonial  Institute. 


28 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


“ The  skin  is  very  slack,  and  by  raising  and  lower- 
ing the  rod  alternately  a more  or  less  continuous 
current  of  air  is  supplied  to  the  hearth.  There  is  no 
inlet  valve  to  these  bellows,  and  the  air  supplied 
enters  by  the  wooden  tue-pipes,  a space  being  left 
between  the  hearth  stone  and  the  nozzles  for  the 
purpose  ; the  bellows  and  hearth  rest  upon  the 
ground.  . . . 

“For  heavier  work  a large  smooth,  undressed 
and  water-worn  stone  does  duty  for  an  anvil,  but  for 
smaller  work  another  anvil  is  provided  like  a silver- 
smith’s, made  of  metal  produced  locally.  The 
hammers  look  at  first  sight  like  so  many  rude  lumps 
of  iron  roughly  handled  with  the  same,  but  a closer 
inspection  shows  them  to  be  systematically  shaped 
and  diamond-wise  in  section  so  as  to  expose  a flat  or 
an  edged  surface  by  a single  turn  of  the  wrist ; it  is 
an  ingenious  pattern.  ...  With  such  simple  means 
as  these  the  smith  puddles  the  iron  which  has  been 
smelted  after  the  manner  already  explained. 

“ These  smiths  prefer  their  native  iron  to  the  bars 
imported.” 

Mr.  Bellamy  continues,  “ Not  the  least  important 
feature  in  this  industry  is  the  marked  regularity  which 
characterised  each  operation  and  the  enthusiasm 
which  seemed  to  inspire  the  workers.  Strangely  at 
variance  with  the  usual  custom  of  the  Ethiopian, 
there  was  no  noise,  no  bustle ; no  confusion  ; no 
sound  but  the  hum  of  preoccupation  was  to  be 
heard  throughout  the  whole  village  ; at  the  right 
moment  the  kiln  was  prepared,  and  lighted,  sealed 
charged  and  drawn  ; at  the  right  moment 
when  the  fire  was  drawn,  little  boys  stood  ready 
with  their  calabash  trays  to  take  away  the  live 


XII  OGUN,  OSHOWSI,  AND  THE  HUNTER  129 

charcoal,  and  at  the  right  moment  they  brought  the 
necessary  green  creepers  with  which  to  draw  the  pig 
from  the  cupola,  or  water  to  quench  the  fire.  All 
this  indicated  systematic  control  and  the  strong  hand 
of  authority,  and  method  only  acquired  by  long 
practice  and  passed  on  from  one  generation  to  the 
next.” 


K 


CHAPTER  XIII 

SEASONS 

It  is  quite  impossible  to  understand  the  philosophy 
of  the  African  without  some  knowledge  of  his  seasons. 
Meteorologically  this  is  not  very  hard,  at  any  rate,  in  a 
place  like  Olokemeji  where  the  seasons  are  marked. 
A glance  at  the  chart  will  be  sufficient.  It  will  be 
noted  that  the  year  is  divided  into  thirteen  lunar  months. 
Many  natives  will  tell  you  that  there  are  fourteen 
months  in  their  year,  but  this  we  will  explain  further 
on,  we  are  now  only  considering  the  lunar  months 
as  they  are  looked  upon  by  many  followers  of 
I fa. 

The  Yoruba  are  now  more  or  less  skilled  farmers 
and  live  chiefly  on  the  products  of  their  farms,  so  far 
as  farinaceous  food  is  concerned,  but  we  know  that 
there  was  a time  when  they  were  far  more  dependent  on 
forest  products.  It  is  most  remarkable  how  many 
semi-wild  products  the  natives  have  to  fall  back  upon 
which  at  one  time  their  ancestors  may  have  had  to  live 
on  almost  entirely.  And  a great  advantage  is  that,  as 
far  as  my  knowledge  goes,  they  are  able  to  feed  on  either 
the  leaves  or  the  fruit  of  most  of  the  undermentioned 

130 


CH.  XIII 


SEASONS 


I3I 

plants  all  the  year  round.  The  names  of  some  of  these 
are  the  Ogunmo  (?),  the  Oyo  or  Chorchorus  olitorius, 
the  Awsun,  one  of  the  Solanacese,  the  Agbagba  or 
Musa  sapientum  var : paradisiaca,  the  Yanrin  or 
Lactuca  sp,  the  Tete  Aramanthus  sp,  the  Ebolo  or 
Gynura  sp,  the  Odu  (?),  the  Ajefawu  (?),  the  Ebure  or 

Natj'ue  lunar  months 


Gynura  cernua,  the  Yangobi  (?),  the  Ishapa  or  Hibiscus 
sp,  the  Ila  or  Hibiscus  esculentus,  the  Awin  or  the 
Dialium  guineensis  and  the  Igba  or  the  Parkia 
filicoidea. 

The  end  of  the  rainy  season  and  the  beginningof  the 
dry  (about  November)  forms  a kind  of  season  by 
itself  and  is  called  Odun  (year).  The  farmers  go  on 


K 2 


132 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


weeding  their  farms  to  give  the  crops  of  their  second 
harvest  a chance.  It  is  about  the  end  of  this  season 
that  babies  of  parents  married  in  the  spring  are  born. 
Before  the  long  grass  becomes  dry  and  brittle  they  cut 
and  stack  it  for  re-roofing  their  houses. 

The  Dry  Season. 

The  dry  season  is  divided  into  two  sections  of  two 
months  each.  White  mists  1 cover  the  land,  it  is  very 
hot  during  the  day,  and  the  temperature  during  the 
night  falls  as  low  as  5 2°,  which  we  regard  much 
as  you  at  home  look  upon  your  freezing  point. 
Bosman  considered  this  great  change  of  temperature 
as  the  cause  of  much  of  the  sickness  on  the  coast : 
“ The  unwholesomeness  of  this  coast,”  he  says,  “ in  my 
opinion,  seems  chiefly  owing  to  the  heat  of  the  day 
and  coolness  of  the  night,  which  sudden  change  I am 
induced  to  believe  occasions  several  effects  in  our  bodies, 
especially  in  those  not  accustomed  to  bear  more  heat 
than  cold,  by  too  hastily  throwing  off  their  clothes  to 
cool  too  fast.”  Then  Barbot  tells  us  that  “ the  air  tho  ’ 
not  so  cold  is  much  thinner  and  more  piercing  than  in 
England,  and  corrodes  iron  much  faster.”  The  cold 
wind  blowing  from  the  East  is  called  the  Harmattan  by 
us  and  Oye  by  the  natives,  who  liken  it  to  a giant  who 
lives  in  a cavern  somewhere  to  the  North  of  Ilorin,  or 
then  in  the  mountain  Igebeti  where  the  Devil  rules 
supreme. 

1 It  is  possible  that  the  ideas  surrounding  “Obatala”  have  been 
connected  with  this  whiteness  in  the  heavens,  which  commences  as  soon 
as  the  rains  are  over  in  November  and  December. 


XIII 


SEASONS 


J33 


The  farmers  now  gather  their  second  harvest  of 
corn,  and  that  of  beans  and  guinea-corn.  They  clear 
land  for  their  next  season’s  crops,  and  burn  the  drying 
bush  they  have  already  felled. 

They  now  enjoy  eating  crickets,  and  the  fruits  of 
the  Idofin  tree  and  Ketemfe  are  added  to  their  veget- 
able bill  of  fare.  The  leaves  of  the  Ketemfe  are 
called  Ewe  iran,  and  they  are  used  also  for  roofing 
their  houses. 

This  is  their  fishing  season,  when  traps  are  placed 
at  the  mouths  of  all  small  streams. 


Part  II. 

This  dry  season  (Erun)  continues  for  the  next  two 
months,  but  during  the  latter  part  of  the  second  month 
rumbling  thunder  is  heard,  and  small  rains  fall.  The 
farmer  goes  on  preparing  the  ground,  and  starts  plant- 
ing yams.  They  still  eat  crickets,  and  make  good  use 
of  the  semi-wild  products  already  mentioned.  Fishing 
of  course  goes  on,  but  the  long  grass  having  been 
burnt  and  the  fresh  herbage  making  its  appearance, 
this  part  of  the  dry  season  is  the  hunter’s  ideal  time. 

It  is  now  perhaps  time  to  consider  the  so-called 
fourteen  months  of  the  ancient  Yoruba  year.  We 
have  already  pointed  out  the  confusion  in  some 
observers’  minds  concerning  the  four  days  of  the 
Yoruba  week,  which  some  say  is  composed  of  four 
days,  and  some  of  five.  This  same  mystification 
recurs  in  the  number  of  days  said  to  complete  one  of 


CALENDAR 


c/d 

!* 

C 


Q 


M 


O 

i— i 

ON 

M 


Oi 

o 

C/3 

B 

H 

Z 

o 

w 

> 

l-H 

H 

<1 

£ 


O 

c4 

< 

W 


< 

PQ 

Pi 

o 


H 

IS 

U 

G 

a 

< 


Thu 


CO  O'  O *-"•  Cl  CO  — . Nk_/ 

►-.•-hi-hc1CIC1C1C1C1C1C1C1C1  co® 


vO  x\  oo  o O 


O S CM  ^ ^ ^ 'O  ^Co  CKO  sjjs  <\i  ^ ^ 

Cl  <\)  ^ c\l  ^ V ^ <\l  ^ cy^w 


^ Ox  O tt  S <\i  <V>  ^ Ir^  (0  C^ 

t\j  0,J  C\1'’  CNj  CN,  (Vj  C\)  Ox®  w 


^ 'o  t^°o  Os  o s a s <\i  °o  ^ ^°o  os 

C\jJC\1C\1C^C^0r)fV^0 


^o  OxO  sr^.  ^ 'o  °o  0x0  s O) 

Oj  Oj  Orj  <v>  3 * * S S S 


<\l 

X)- 

Co 

Ox 

10 

II 

12 

s 

16 

s 

1 

1 

"O 

°o 

Ox 

0 

s 

<x 

po 

X)- 

U) 

'O 

°o 

Ox 

0 

1 

1 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

>• 

s 

s 

s 

s 

<\1 

1 

1 

°0 

Ox 

0 

s 

<\l 

w 

XI- 

'O 

°0 

Os 

0 

s 

<Nl 

1 

1 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

s 

<\1 

<x 

1 

1 

0 

Cl 

CO 

i-r> 

\o 

N 

CO 

ON 

0 

n 

CO 

IA 

1 

1 

*-* 

*“• 

*"• 

HH 

ci 

O 

Cl 

Cl 

Cl 

Cl 

1 

1 

o 


CO  *-f  UO 

Cl  Cl  Cl  Cl 


co-^-^vO  OO  Ov  O 

m^hhhhhhhhh-.^ 


«-•  Cl  cOrfuoxO  CO 

C1NC1C1C1C1C1C1 


>x 


!>> 

fl 

T3 

e 

3 

to 


The  figures  in  Italics  denote  the  ancient  Yoruba  year,  which  commenced  on  the  28th  March  and  ended  on  the  6th  November. 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


136 

their  months.  Some  say  that  there  are  sixteen,  and 
others  seventeen,  days  in  a native  month.  The 
natives,  as  we  have  already  explained,  rest  on  the 
fifth  day,  that  is  to  say,  having  counted  four  days, 
they  really  rest  on  the  first  day  of  the  next  week, 
counting  that  day  as  one.  So  in  their  next  great 
division  of  time  they  say  that  they  rest  on  the  seven- 
teenth day,  which  is  a great  market  day,  and  this  is, 
of  course,  the  first  day  of  what  is  their  second  so- 
called  month.  Fourteen  of  these  months  completed 
the  ancient  Yoruba  so-called  year.  In  other  words, 
the  ancients  only  valued  the  rain  season.  It  was  the 
first  rumble  of  thunder  that  recalled  the  fisherman 
and  hunter  to  their  huts,  and  caused  them  to  com- 
mence to  count  the  days.  They  thought  the  father  in 
heaven  had  set  his  Forger  Ogun  to  work  to  make  his 
thunderbolts  so  that  he  might  carry  on  his  war  to 
secure  wives. 

The  ancient  Yoruba  then  counted  four  weeks  of 
four  days,  and  on  the  seventeenth  day  put  one  cowry 
in  a calabash  or  gourd,  and  when  he  had  counted  four- 
teen of  these  he  knew  it  was  nearing  the  time  when 
his  pregnant  wife  should  bear  him  a child.  That  is  to 
say,  the  eighth  month  which  he  feared  for  his  wife’s 
sake  was  now  ended.  This  was  the  all-important  part 
of  the  year  to  him,  the  rest  of  the  time  after  the  birth 
of  his  child  he  occupied  in  fishing  and  hunting.  Thus 
to  him  the  year  was  composed  of  4X4X  14,  or  224 
days.  And  thus  we  hear  of  the  Yoruba  speaking  of 
his  having  fourteen  months  in  his  year,  and  the 
traveller,  concluding  that  he  is  referring  to  lunar 


XIII 


SEASONS 


137 


months,  is  puzzled.  And  in  many  localities  we  still 
find  that  it  is  only  during  the  rain  season  that  the 
worship  of  local  Orishas  takes  place.  In  asking 
natives  for  the  names  of  the  months  of  the  lunar 
year  seven  or  eight  Orishas’  names  only  have  at  times 
been  given  to  me.  This  seems  to  me  to  show  that 
the  I fa  lunar  calendar  system  is  of  a later  date,  which 
has  not  even  yet,  in  many  parts,  become  general. 

We  will  now  return  to  our  lunar  calendar. 


The  Rain  Season. 

The  season  of  rain  may  be  divided  into  two  parts 
separated  one  from  the  other  by  a little  dry  season. 
The  first  section  is  composed  of  five  lunar  months  of 
rain,  the  latter  of  two  lunar  months,  one  nearly  dry 
month  intervening. 

The  first  two  months  of  this  section  of  the  rains  is 
called  Asheroh  ojo.  It  is  the  tornado  season  when 
thunder,  lightning,  wind  and  rain,  and  Jakuta,  the 
stone-thrower,  all  do  their  best  to  frighten  the  timid 
into  a proper  consideration  of  their  powers.  And  I 
think  no  one  of  us  who  has  experienced  some  of  these 
great  storms  will  dare  to  say  that  on  some  occasion 
or  other  a very  loud  clap  of  thunder  has  not  made 
him  jump,  as  the  saying  goes.  I remember  once  at  a 
place  called  Musuku  on  the  Kongo  river  a man  and 
his  wife  and  child  were  all  struck  senseless  by  thunder, 
as  they  were  not  struck  by  lightning.  Luckily,  I have 
never  experienced  any  accident  of  this  terrible  nature, 
but  I have  been  caught  in  the  bush  by  “ Zaci  and 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


138 

his  twenty-four  dogs,”  as  they  call  thunder  and  light- 
ning in  the  Kongo,  and  wished  myself  well  out  of  it. 

While  on  this  subject  I think  we  may  all  congratu- 
late ourselves  on  not  having  been  in  Axim  in  the  year 
1693  or  1694,  when,  Bosman  says,  “the  thunder  broke 
all  the  drinking  glasses  of  the  Factor’s  chamber,  and 
raised  up  his  child  with  the  bed  under  it,  both  which 
it  threw  some  feet  distant,  without  the  least  hurt  done. 
What  do  you  think,  Sir  ? Was  it  possible  for  a stone 
to  do  this?  I believe  not.”  I think  we  are  all  wise 
enough  to-day  to  agree  with  Bosman,  but  the  stone- 
thrower,  Jakuta,  has  a good  deal  to  answer  for  in 
Y orubaland. 

At  the  beginning  of  this  season  the  farmer  plants  his 
first  crop  of  corn  and  groundnuts,  and  later  Bara,  Igba, 
and  Agbe,  or  gourds  used  by  them  for  all  manner  of 
household  purposes.  Mushrooms  are  now  added  to 
his  bill  of  fare.  This  is  the  ancient  season  of 
marriage. 

The  next  two  months  compose  the  season  when  the 
rainfall  reaches  its  maximum.  The  farmer  weeds  and 
keeps  his  farm  as  tidy  as  he  can,  but  everything  grows 
apace,  and  he  has  to  work  hard  if  he  wishes  to  reap  a 
fair  harvest.  He  is  rewarded  towards  the  end  of  the 
second  month  by  being  able  to  eat  new  corn.  His  main 
crop,  however,  is  left  standing  until  it  is  quite  dry, 
which  is  not  until  the  little  dry  season  sets  in,  in  the 
next  season.  He  gathers  the  fruit  of  the  Emi  ori  or 
Shea  butter  tree,  and  mushrooms  are  still  to  be 
found. 

This  subdivision  of  the  rain  season  is  called  Aga, 


XIII 


SEASONS 


*39 


probably  because  the  corn  has  grown  tall  during  the 
last  month.  The  Yoruba  have  a saying  that  the 
woman  who  is  married  in  the  month  of  Aga  will  eat 
pounded  corn. 

The  Awori  season  is  composed  of  one  month  of  rain 
and  the  little  dry  season.  The  farmer  digs  up  his  first 
crop  of  yams,  and  gathers  in  his  corn  and  ground  nuts 
and  gourds.  Before  the  rains  have  stopped  he  has 
sown  the  seed  for  a second  crop  of  corn,  beans,  ground 
nuts,  and  guinea-corn  and  he  also  now  sows  cotton. 

This  is  said  to  be  a marriage  season  also,  but  it  is 
evidently  a time  of  harvest. 

The  next  two  months  are  called  the  Arokuro  season, 
and,  like  the  first  two  months  of  the  rains,  they  are 
tornado  months.  Farmers  fell  the  bush  for  next  year’s 
farms,  and  keep  on  weeding. 


CHAPTER  XIV 

OKE,  OKO,  AJESHALUGA,  AND  FARMING. 

Farmland  and  Farmers , and  the  Orishas  Oke,  Oko  and 
Ajeshaluga. 

Yorubaland  may  be  divided  into  three  great  zones, 
one  of  very  little  use  to  the  farmer  as  farmland,  but 
of  service  to  him  as  the  zone  that  in  the  olden  days 
provided  him  with  salt,  i.e.  the  Mangrove  belt.  Here 
the  seaside  inhabitant  used  to  cut  down  the  salt  bush 
and  manufacture  salt,  which  he  sent  with  smoked  fish 
into  the  interior  and  exchanged  for  farm  produce. 
Here  also  oyster  shells  were  burnt  and  lime  made, 
but  this  does  not  appear  to  have  been  used  by  the 
farmers,  and  I think  we  may  conclude  that  the 
industry  was  acquired  from  the  early  white  settlers. 
The  native  farmers  have  long  known  that  leguminous 
crops  nourish  the  land,  but  they  have  not  yet  learnt 
the  use  of  lime  as  a manure,  although  it  is  perhaps 
the  manure  most  needed  in  this  country. 

The  next  zone  as  you  travel  inland  is  composed  of 
evergreen  tropical  forests  and  mixed  forests,  in  which 
we  find  the  excellent  Egba  farmers. 

The  third  zone  is  that  which  is  called  the  dry  open 


140 


ch.  xiv  OKE,  OKO,  AJESHALUGA,  AND  FARMING  141 

forest,  where  the  rainfall  is  from  thirty  to  forty-five 
inches  per  annum.  For  a full  description  of  these 
zones  I must  refer  you  to  the  Conservator  of  Forests’ 
Report  on  the  Forest  Administration  of  Southern 
Nigeria  for  1906. 

The  Yoruba  call  the  forest  land  Igbo,  the  mixed 
forest  Odan,  and  the  open  grassland  Pappa. 

Forest  land  is  generally  felled  during  the  latter  rains 
and  the  dry  season. 

In  the  open  grass  country  the  grass  is  burnt  in  the 
dry  season,  and  the  land  cultivated  for  three  or  four 
years,  and  then  allowed  to  lie  fallow  for  some  years, 
but  the  forest  land  will  stand  from  five  to  seven  years’ 
crops,  and  even  then  water  yams  and  plantains  may 
be  grown  on  it.  This  land  is  then  allowed  to  lie 
fallow  for  two  or  three  years,  when  it  is  again  brought 
into  use  for  two  or  three  years  : then  it  used  to  be 
allowed  to  lie  fallow  for  twenty  or  thirty  years.  Farm 
land  is  known  as  Oko,  and  fallow  as  Ashale. 

The  farmer  also  knows  a great  deal  more  about 
soils  than  is  generally  credited  to  him.  He  prefers, 
naturally  enough,  the  good  loamy  forest  land  which 
he  calls  Ebole,  a stony  loam  he  names  Ebole  olokuta, 
the  sandy  loam  Hero : then  he  talks  of  red  and 
black  soils  as  Ilepa  and  Iledu.  Clay  he  terms  Amo, 
and  it  is  of  a yellow  colour,  the  white  clay  he  calls 
Amofunfun,  and  that  which  is  mixed  with  sand  and 
cracks  in  the  dry  season  is  known  by  the  name  Tara. 
Sand  is  called  Yanrin. 

It  will  be  readily  understood  that  in  this  study  of 
the  native  farmer  I am  not  attempting  to  write  an 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


142 

up-to-date  paper  on  the  state  of  agriculture  in 
Southern  Nigeria.  On  the  contrary  I am  purposely 
leaving  out  all  mention  of  all  our  Agege  and  other 
advanced  planters,  of  whom  we  are  all  so  justly  proud. 
I am,  in  fact,  dealing  only  with  the  less  favoured 
so-called  pagan  farmer  in  his  capacity  as  a worshipper 
of  certain  Orishas. 

The  Egba  farmer  is  a very  pleasant  and  hospitable 
man  to  meet,  as  well  as  most  interesting.  One  of 
these  simple  folk  told  me  that  when  it  was  time 
to  fell  the  bush  to  make  a new  farm  he  gave  a 
present  to  his  chief,  and  asked  him  to  give  him 
some  people  to  help.  On  the  day  fixed  for  their 
coming  he  prepared  food  for  them.  They  cut  the 
bush,  and  ate  and  drank  at  his  expense.  He  and 
his  family  then  burnt  the  felled  timber,  and  when 
the  first  rains  came  he  sowed  corn.  For  two  or  three 
years  he  planted  corn  and  yams  on  this  land,  he 
also  planted  beans  with  the  corn.  He  said  Ebole 
land  might  be  used  for  as  many  as  ten  or  eleven  years 
before  it  was  exhausted.  Ilero  soil  was  good  for 
corn  and  yams  for  two  or  three  years. 

If  the  land  belongs  to  the  farmer  the  produce  is 
his  own,  but  if  he  has  been  allowed  to  farm  it  by 
the  owner  he  has  to  give  him  a part  of  the  product. 

Before  planting  they  generally  offered  some  sacrifice 
to  their  departed  parents,  and  asked  them  to  see  that 
their  crops  were  successful.  He  said  he  knew  a man 
who,  to  get  good  beans,  used  to  mix  a powder  with  his 
seed. 

When  yams  begin  to  sprout,  and  the  first  leaves 


XIV  OKE,  OKO,  AJESHALUGA,  AND  FARMING  143 

begin  to  appear,  women  are  not  allowed  to  go  on  the 
yam  fields.  A man  at  Ilaro,  that  he  knew,  was  very 
strict  on  this  point,  and  prohibited  all  women  from 
walking  through  the  fields,  lest  any  with  menses 
should  go,  and  so  spoil  the  yam  crop.  He  also  told 
me  that  the  farmer’s  Orishas  were  Oke,  Oko  and 
Ajeshaluga. 

Agbolo’s  son,  a great  hunter  and  farmer,  told  me 
that  the  farmers  near  Olokemeji  had  a society  for  mutual 
help,  called  Aro  or  Owe.  This  was  composed  of  four 
great  officers,  Ashipa,  Obawunju,  Oluri  and  Ekesin, 
and  that  these  four  were  helped  by  a kind  of  Council 
of  twelve,  composed  of  six  Iwarefa  and  six  Egbe 
Iwarefa.  It  was  a semi-religious  society,  and  Ashipa, 
when  the  rains  failed,  about  April,  was  asked  to  offer  a 
sacrifice  to  Oke.  They  made  a little  mound  of  earth, 
and  planted  bananas  round  it.  They  then  killed  a cock, 
and  took  four  kola  nuts  and  placed  them  on  the  mound. 
They  next  went  home,  and  cooked  some  yams,  and 
pounded  them  into  a kind  of  pudding.  This  they 
carried  to  the  mound,  and  taking  the  cock  whose  blood 
had  all  soaked  into  the  earth,  they  cooked  it  and  ate  it 
with  the  yams.  They  also  poured  rum  or  gin  or  palm 
wine  on  the  mound.  Then,  as  they  danced  and  prayed, 
the  rain  came.  At  the  time  of  the  new  yams  they  sacri- 
ficed to  Oko,  who  was  their  Orisha  of  harvest.  And 
at  the  end  of  the  year,  when  all  their  crops  were  stored, 
they  assembled  in  Ashipa’s  house,  and  he  sacrificed  to 
the  Orisha  of  wealth,  Shalugaor  Ajeshaluga.  I visited 
the  Ashipa,  and  he  confirmed  this.  I then  asked  him  if 
these  three  were  the  only  Orishas  the  farmers  wor- 


144 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


shipped,  and  he  said  “ Yes.”  I mentioned  that  I had 
been  informed  that  Yemoja  had  thirteen  children. 
“Yes.”  I continued,  “I  can  account  for  seven — 
Olokun  and  Olosa,  the  Orishas  of  the  fishermen  ; Ogun 
and  Oshowsi,  the  Orishas  of  the  hunters  ; Oke,  Oko  1 
and  Shaluga,  the  farmer’s  Orishas  ; could  he  tell  me  any- 
thing about  the  others?”  “Yes,  Shango,  Oshun,  Oba  and 
Oya  were  marriage  Orishas,  and  Shankpana  was  the 
Orisha  of  sickness,  and  Dada  the  Orisha  of  babies  and 
things  created.”  He  was  kind  enough  to  refer  to  me  to 
one  Odedaino,  who,  he  said,  could  tell  me  all  about 
marriage. 

Just  as  the  farm  Orishas,  Oke  and  Oko,  have  become 
associated  with  the  marriage  Orishas  Shango  and 
Oshun,  so  the  marriage  Orisha  Oya,  one  of  the  wives 
of  Shango,  cannot  well  be  separated  from  the  farmers’ 
Orisha  of  wealth  and  colour,  Ajeshaluga.  In  fact,  the 
literal  meaning  of  the  word  Ya  is  to  pluck  Indian  corn. 
These  Orishas  will  finally  fall  into  their  places,  in 
accordance  with  the  seasons  they  appear  to  influence. 
The  beginning  of  the  rain,  or  Ashero  ojo  season,  is 
the  old  marriage  season,  thus  Shango,  the  great 
marriage  Orisha,  and  Oke,  the  rain  Orisha,  clearly 
lead  the  way.  Then  we  have  the  marriage  Orisha, 
Oshun,  and  the  harvest  Orisha  Oko  ruling  the  follow- 
ing season  of  two  months  called  Aga,  leaving  us  with 
Oya  and  Ajeshaluga  as  the  gatherer  and  wealth  maker 
ruling  the  season  of  harvest  of  dry  corn,  and  of  all 
fruit. 

1 A minor  Orisha  is  called  Agbarigbo,  who  is  said  to  be  a guardian  at 
the  gate  or  entrance  on  the  way  to  the  farm. 


XIV  OKE,  OKO,  AJESHALUGA,  AND  FARMING  145 

I mention  this  now,  as  I wish  to  be  free  to  describe 
the  Orishas  separately  and  independently  of  the 
seasons  under  the  heading  of  farmer  or  marriage. 

Ajeshaluga 

Ajeshaluga,  or  Shaluga,  is  a very  interesting  Orisha, 
and  it  is  easy  to  see  why  he  is  the  farmers’  deity,  for 
they  were  possibly  the  first  to  accumulate  wealth. 
The  word  Aje  is  translated  “ money  ” ; Aje  means 
trial  by  water,  and  Ajeh  is  a witch.  (No  doubt  the 
people  envying  the  wealthy  declared  them  to  be  witches, 
and  put  them  to  trial  by  water.  In  the  Congo  even 
the  so-called  “ King,”  while  he  might  own  a large 
house,  had  to  reside  in  a small  one,  so  as  not  to  cause 
the  envy  of  his  people.  This,  incidentally,  may  be  one 
of  the  reasons  why  the  natives  of  Africa  have  never 
advanced  beyond  a certain  stage  of  civilisation.) 
Shalu  is  to  recur,  and  ga  is  to  be  tall,  high  : gan  is  to 
despise. 

The  word  seems  to  convey  the  idea  of  a stretching 
out  to  add  money  to  money.  Naturally  he  presides 
over  money  transactions,  and  Bishop  Crowther  quotes 
a proverb  “Aje  Shalua,  ofi  eni  iwaju  sile  she  eni 
ehin  ni  pele,  ori  ki  awran  ki  aw  tan  : Aje  often 
passes  by  the  first  caravan,  as  it  comes  to  the  market, 
and  loads  the  last  with  blessings  ” ( i.e . the  race  is  not 
always  to  the  swift). 

The  prevailing  colour  in  the  market  where  wealth  is 
acquired  is  indigo  blue,  and  in  this  way  perhaps  Aje 
Shaluga  has  been  and  is  the  patron  of  colour.  The 


L 


146  NIGERIAN  STUDIES  ch.  xiv 

large  cowry  is  his  emblem.  The  Yoruba  for  cowry  is 
Owo,  which  also  means  money,  wealth,  trade,  craft. 
Weight  is  evidently  also  connected  with  wealth,  as  a 
great  number  of  cowries  weigh  a good  deal,  in  fact  the 
word  used  for  weight,  heaviness,  importance  is  Wuwo, 
the  act  of  increasing  cowries. 


CHAPTER  XV 


ODUS  OF  IFA 

The  Ifa  Priests  and  Odus 

Just  as  it  is  necessary  to  know  something  of  the 
seasons  before  understanding  the  place  the  farm 
Orishas  take  in  the  philosophy  of  the  Yoruba,  so 
before  touching  on  marriage  we  must  pause  and 
consider  the  priests  of  Ifa,  and  their  system  of  divin- 
ation. 

The  sixteen  snails  of  Yemuhu  (or  Odudua),  Oja 
told  me,  became  the  head  of  Eleda,  and  apparently 
in  the  worship  of  Ifa  sixteen  (plus  one)  palm  kernels, 
or  Odus,  take  their  place.  The  Yoruba  word  for 
a snail  is  Igbin,  and  the  verb  Gbin  is  to  breathe  with 
difficulty,  so  that  Igbin  means  literally  that  which 
breathes  with  difficulty.  Igba,  you  will  remember, 
is  the  calabash  cut  in  two  representing  heaven  and 
earth,  within  which  Obatala  and  Odudua  were 
enclosed.  I quote  later  on  a native  legend  from 
Historical  Notes  of  the  Yoruba  People  by  Mr.  George, 
where  the  breaking  of  Igba  causes  famine.  Igba 
also  means  the  number  200,  and  is  said  to  be  the 
calabash  in  which  the  201  Odus  of  Ifa  are  kept. 


147 


L 2 


148 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


Awnomila  is  the  Bini  for  Orunmila,  another  name 
for  I fa,  and  amongst  those  people  it  is  the  name 
of  a small  basin  wrapped  in  cloth  containing  the 
Iviawnomila,  or  sixteen  sacred  palm  nuts  of  I fa. 

Bishop  Johnson  says:  “He  (Ifa)  is  represented 
chiefly  by  sixteen  palm  nuts,  each  having  from 
four  to  ten,  or  more,  eyelets  on  them.  Behind 
each  one  of  these  representative  nuts  are  sixteen 
subordinate  divinities.  Each  one  of  the  whole  lot 
is  termed  an  Odu,  which  means  a chief,  a head.  This 
makes  the  number  of  Odus  altogether  256.  Besides 
these  there  are  sixteen  other  Odus  connected  with 
each  of  the  256,  and  this  makes  the  whole  number 
of  Odus  4,096.  Some  increase  this  large  number 
still  by  a further  addition  of  sixteen  to  each  of  the 
last  number  of  Odus,  but  the  sixteen  principal  ones 
are  those  more  frequently  in  requisition. 

“ There  is  a series  of  traditional  stories,  each  of 
which  is  called  a road  and  is  connected  with  a parti- 
cular Odu.  Each  Odu  is  supposed  to  have  1,680  of 
these  stories  connected  with  it.” 

Bishop  Phillips  has  collected  about  105  of  these 
and  adven  them  to  us  in  his  little  Yoruba  book  called 
Ifa. 

Ellis  (pages  59-60  the  Yortib a- speaking  Peoples)  says  : 
“ For  the  consultation  of  Ifa  a whitened  board  is 
employed,  exactly  similar  to  those  used  by  children 
in  Moslem  Schools  in  lieu  of  slates,  about  two  feet 
long  and  eight  or  nine  inches  broad,  on  which  are 
marked  sixteen  figures.  These  figures  are  called 
‘ mothers.’  The  sixteen  palm  nuts  are  held  loosely 


XV 


ODUS  OF  IFA 


149 


in  the  right  hand,  and  thrown  through  the  half  closed 
fingers  into  the  left  hand.  If  one  nut  remains  in 
the  right  hand,  two  marks  are  made,  thus — 11,  and 
if  two  remain  one  mark — 1.  This  process  is  repeated 
eight  times,  and  the  marks  are  made  in  succession 
in  two  columns  of  four  each.  In  this  way  are  formed 
the  sixteen  mothers,  one  of  which  is  declared  by  the 
Babalawo  to  represent  the  enquirer ; 1 and  from  the 
order  in  which  the  others  are  produced  he  deduces 
certain  results.” 

Ellis  then  gives  the  sixteen  “ mothers.” 

I obtained  the  order  of  the  Odus  from  Oliyitan,  an 
I fa  priest,  and  to  make  sure  that  the  order  was  correct 
so  far  as  he  was  concerned,  I asked  him  to  give  me 
the  order  again  about  three  months  afterwards.  As  it 
was  exactly  the  same  I have  adopted  this  as  correct. 

It  may  therefore  be  of  interest  to  give  Bishop 
Johnson’s,  Bishop  Phillips’,  Colonel  Ellis’  and  my  list 
side  by  side  to  see  how  far  they  agree. 


Ellis'. 

Johtison's. 

Phillips'. 

The  Writer’s. 

Ogbe 

Ogbe 

Ogbe 

Yekuru 

Oyekun 

Oyeku 

Oyeku 

Iwori 

Iwori 

Iwori 

Di 

Edi 

Odi 

Odi 

Loshu 

Urosi 

Iroshu 

Iroshun 

Owaran 

Owourin 

Owourin 

Bara 

Obara 

Obara 

Okaran 

Okauran 

Okouron 

Kuda 

Ogunda 

Oguda 

Oguda 

1 There  are  16  plus  i nuts,  and  as  far  as  my  information  goes  the  17th 
is  the  enquirer. 


150 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


Ellis'. 

Johnson's. 

Sa 

Osa 

Ka 

Eka 

Durapin 

Oturupon 

Ture 

Eture 

Leti 

Erete 

Shi 

Ose 

Fu 

Ofu 

Phillip's. 

The  Writer's. 

Osa 

Osa 

Ika 

Ika 

Oturupon 

Oturupon 

Otura 

Otura 

Irete 

Irete 

Oshe 

Oshe 

Ofu 

Ofu 

Ellis  mentions  also  the  following  Akala,  Abila, 
Orun,  Ode,  Burn.  Bishop  Phillips,  in  addition  to  the 
above,  gives — Ate,  Tutu,  Oka,  Adoka,  Egutan  Oriko, 
Egu,  Sete,  Dawo,  Osutele,  and  Itegu. 

On  page  215  of  At  the  Back  of  the  Black  Mans 
Mind  I give  as  one  of  the  chalk  marks  renewed 
on  the  first  day  of  the  week  in  front  of  the  sacred 
groves,  the  following  : 

I will  now  give  you  the  reading  of 
this  figure. 

Ifa  is  known  by  the  name  Owa, 
the  being  whose  advent  filled  men 
with  joy.  He  is  also  Orunmila,  or 
Heaven  and  the  wise  Reconciler. 
In  this  figure  the  sun  is  called 
Baba  ye  Omo,  another  name  for  Ifa, 
meaning-  “ Father.” 


This  is  Ifa  in  his  character  as  the  heavenly  revealer, 
the  Sun,  but  he  is  also  the  propagator,  and  this  is 
where  secrecy  and  darkness  come  in,  so  there  is  a line 
drawn  dividing  the  light  side  of  his  character  from 
that  which  is  dark  and  secret.  As  I have  pointed  out, 


XV 


ODUS  OF  IFA 


151 

he  is  here  represented  by  Eshu,  which  is  the  next 
figure,  i.e.  that  of  the  new  moon  ; and  this  is  called 
Odu  or  Edu,  that  which  is  black,  or,  as  they  say,  the 
“ one  that  troubles  have  made  black.”  I have  already 
pointed  out  that  Odu  = Oshu,  the  moon  ; Edu  thus  is 
another  form  of  Eshu,  the  devil,  or  I fa,  as  procreator. 
Odu  or  Eshu  is  in  the  place  of  the  Bashorun,  as 
President  of  the  Council,  and  as  he  is  helped  by  three 
officers  so  Odu  is  helped  by  the  three  symbols  repre- 
senting the  three  stars.  Their  names  are  given  as — 

Ogbe  Meji,  the  one  that  succours. 

Oyeku  ,,  the  one  that  heralds. 

Iwori  ,,  the  one  that  sets. 

Representing  the  treasurer,  the  messenger,  and  the 
arbitrator. 

As  we  have  noted,  there  is  always  a questioner  who 
asks  the  Diviners  something.  In  this  case  it  is  the 
17th  Odu,  or  the  one  that  stands  aside,  and  its  name 
is  Odin  or  Edi.  The  verb  Di  = Da  to  make  or  create. 
Thus  we  can  conclude  that  the  questioner  asks,  “What 
about  Creation?”  Taking  the  order  as  given  to  me 
by  the  Babalawo  the  answer  is  : 


Iroshun  = 
Owourin  = 
Obara  = 

Okoron  = 

filtration  1 

that  which  drizzles  J 

that  which  bears  the  oil 
seed  Egusi 

the  dry  bed  of  a river  J 

l water 
|- earth 

Oguda  = 

that  which  pounds  and 
creates 

1 heat 

Osa 

that  which  dries  and  1 
evaporates  J 

[marriage 

rain 

I k;i 

he  who  reaps,  harvest 

J-  1st  harvest 

tin  making  of 
< man  “ Con- 

Oturupon  = 

he  who  gathers 

l ception” 

152 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


Otura 

Irete 


Oshe 

Ofu 


translated  to  me  as  ease, 
happiness,  hope,  when 
there  is  no  anxiety  - 
about  food,  a time  of 
V.  fruitfulness 


= that  which  shall  be 
= emission 


fin  the  making  of  man, 
the  time  when  the 
woman  shows  signs 
of  pregnancy  and 
she  is  happy  and 
hopeful 

to  appear  in  the  'i 

wrong  month  I pain,  suffer- 
without  being  ing,  travail 
expected  J 


Taking  these  Odus  in  the  order  thus  given  to  me, 
and  remembering  the  order  of  the  seasons,  there  can 
be  no  doubt  that  they  tell  us  of  the  order  of  propaga- 
tion ; neither  can  one  doubt  from  the  literal  translations 
given  that  the  categories  and  their  order  which  I 
discovered  to  be  at  the  back  of  the  Black  man’s  mind 


in  the  Congo  are  also  at  the  back  of  the  mind  of  the 
Yoruba  Babalawo.  But  this  will  be  more  plainly  seen 
when  I have  finished  describing  the  parts  that  the 
offspring  of  Yemoja  fill  in  the  “ Ogboni  ” of  the 
Orishas. 

According  to  Bishop  Johnson  in  his  “ Yoruba 
Heathenism,”  there  are  three  grades  of  Babalawo  (see 
page  251  At  the  Back  of  the  Black  Mans  Mind), 
but  I fa’s  Ogboni  is  composed  of  the  following  priests  : 


Babalawo,  Olowo,  Odofin,  Asawo. 

AjigTona  and  assistant  ) , n-  , -c 

& / who  oner  human  sacrifice. 

Awaro  ,,  ,,  j 

Aro 

Asarepawo,,  ,, 

Apetebi  or  Ayawo  and  assistant. 


N.B.  Bishop  Johnson,  in  Yoruba  Heathenism , tells  us  the  priestess 
called  Apetebi,  Esu  or  Ayawo,  who  may  in  reality  be  the  wife  of  a priest 
or  of  anyone  for  whom  a sacrifice  is  to  be  offered,  is  regarded  as  the  wife 
of  Orunmila  or  Ifa. 


ODUS  OF  IFA 


xv 


T53 


I have  not  discovered  the  name  of  the  sixth  and  his 
assistant. 

The  place  these  priests  take  in  marriage  and  birth 
ceremonies  will  shortly  be  shown  under  the  chapter 
headed  “Marriage.”  We  have  had  a “flood”  story, 
and  noted  the  part  played  by  Ifa  in  making  the  world 
fit  again  for  human  habitation.  In  the  following 
extracts  from  Mr.  George’s  story  of  the  breaking  of 
Igba  at  Ife,  Ifa  as  Orunmila  plays  a notable  part  in 
the  fall  of  man,  his  punishment  by  famine,  and  his 
salvation. 

As  Mr.  George  says,  all  I fa’s  sayings  generally 
open  with  some  sort  of  aphoristic  verse  which  in- 
variably explains  the  whole  object  of  the  piece.  Thus, 
the  first  verse  tells  how  all  the  world  met  in  the 
King’s  courtyard  to  discuss  the  cause  of  the  breaking 
of  the  world-renowned  Igba,  or  calabash,  of  Ife. 

i.  They  called  Awlawta  to  come  and  put  it  together 
again,  but  he  could  not. 


4.  Ogun  also  is  sent  for  ; which  means  that  war  was 
declared  over  this  breakage. 

But  none  of  them  could  put  the  calabash  together 
again. 

People  farmed  and  waited  for  the  rain,  but  none 
came.  Then  hunger  came,  and  man  and  beast  mourned 
for  their  dead. 

5.  The  Obalufon  from  Iyinde. 

6.  Laberinjo  from  Ido. 

7.  Jigure  from  Otun  Moba. 

8.  Esegba,  an  Egba. 


called. 


*54 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


9.  Asadu  from  Ijesa. 

10.  Akoda  from  Ife. 

11.  Aseda  Araba  (the  law-giving  cotton  tree),  their 
father. 

All  these  could  not  put  the  calabash  together  again. 

Then  the  pigeon  weakens  in  the  Eselu  bush. 

The  snail  does  the  like  in  the  bamboo,  etc. 

They  could  not  put  the  calabash  together  again. 

They  call 

12.  Olumo  from  Imori. 

13.  Ogun  of  Alara. 

14.  Ogbon  of  Ijero. 

15.  Odudugbundu  of  Eshemaiva,  the  Awbawle 
bogun  Baba  wow  Ketu  Er,  the  father  devil  who  lived 
in  Ketu. 

But  all  these  could  do  nothing. 

To  continue,  in  verse  3 the  people  call  in 

1.  Akonilogbon,  and 

2.  Afonahanni,  and  ask  their  assistance. 

They  advised  them  to  call  in 

3.  Ototo  Enia,  the  truthful  one.  They  asked  him 
to  call  Olofin.  He  refused.  But  the  people  re- 
minded him  “ that  from  the  beginning  at  the  creation 
of  the  world  this  duty  of  trumpeter  to  the  man  from 
heaven  was  specially  laid  on  him.  Then  he  blew  his 
trumpet,  and  the  elephant  went  quickly  to  the  Eselu 
bush,  the  wild  ox  to  Elugu  apako,  the  bird  Kekeke 
flies  to  the  ale  plant,  the  rat  runs  to  its  hole,  the  beans 
to  the  brook,  the  dog  to  the  land  of  meditation,  the 
sheep  to  the  country  of  stupidity,  all  beasts  go  to 
beastland,  beings  go  to  the  land  of  beings.”  In  fact, 
as  when  Oro  is  sounded  all  non-members  of  the 
Society  fly  to  their  homes. 


XV 


ODUS  OF  IFA 


i55 


1.  And  Ajalaiye,  he  who  strives  with  earthly  affairs, 

2.  And  Ajalorun,  he  who  strives  with  heavenly 
affairs. 

3.  Ajirilogbon,  he  who  strives  with  matters  con- 
cerning sight  and  wisdom. 

The  people  confess  their  filth,  and  pray  that  he 
should  patch  the  broken  calabash,  and  Ajirilogbon 
tells  them  to  go  and  find  the  leaf  of  a tree  called 
Ewe-Alashuwalu  (which  is  said  to  be  capable  of  re- 
modelling a man’s  evil  character).  They  cannot  find 
it.  He  then  takes  it  out  of  the  bag  of  Egede  (the  bag 
of  deep  mystery),  and  mends  the  broken  Igba  of  Ife, 
and  rain  falls,  and  so  heals  all  the  people,  and  stops 
the  calamity  from  causing  further  harm. 

And  in  this  way  we  find  that  Ifa  and  his  priests  are 
not  only  concerned  with  marriage,  but  also  with  the 
rains  and  the  sin  that  prevents  them  falling  in  due 
season. 

This  story  of  the  breaking  of  the  calabash  and  the 
calling  of  all  these  worthies  to  patch  it  reminds  one 
of  the  story  of  Humpty  Dumpty,  and  how  all  the 
king’s  courtiers  and  all  the  king’s  men  could  not  put 
Humpty  Dumpty  together  again. 

With  this  short  account  of  Ifa,  his  priests  and  their 
Odus,  we  will  close  this  note  and  proceed  to  describe 
the  marriage  Orishas. 


CHAPTER  XVI 

SHANGO OYA — OBA — OSHUN 

Marriage 

In  African  Life  and  Customs  (page  22)  that  remark- 
able African  author,  Dr.  E.  W.  Blyden,  speaking 
of  Jamaica,  says:  “Now  it  is  into  this  region  of  the 
globe  so  hostile  to  the  most  vigorous  European  life 
that  Anglo-Saxon  incuriousness  has  introduced  the 
marriage  laws  of  Europe,  with  the  result  that  during 
the  last  three  hundred  years  very  few  Europeans,  if 
any,  born  in  those  islands  have  achieved  anything  like 
an  international  reputation.  And  why  ? Their  mothers 
have  not  observed  the  regulation  period  of  rest  and 
reserve  which  African  mothers  enjoy.  They  were 
tired  when  the  children  were  born,  and  the  children 
have  suffered  the  same  inability.  There  have  been 
exceptional  cases  of  noted  men  born  in  the  West  Indies 
sufficiently  distinguished  to  be  honoured  by  their 
sovereign  with  the  Companionship  of  the  Bath  and 
with  Knighthood,  but  these  were  men  of  mixed  blood, 
who  were  born  practically  under  polygamic  conditions, 
whose  mothers  enjoyed  the  necessary  period  of 
rest.” 


156 


CH.  XVI 


SHANGO— OYA— OBA— OSHUN 


J57 


There  is  possibly  a good  deal  of  truth  in  Dr. 
Blyden’s  argument,  but  the  question  of  mixed  blood, 
and  of  passion,  must  not  be  ignored  as  possible  factors 
in  these  cases.  Trying  to  look  at  this  from  a Black 
man’s  point  of  view,  I cannot  forget  the  fact  that  not 
only  among  the  Bavili  (now  in  Congo  Francais),  but 
also  in  the  kingdom  of  Benin,  and  without  doubt 
among  the  Yoruba,  it  is  and  was  the  custom  for  the 
daughters  of  the  king  to  cohabit  with  such  men  as 
they  chose  without  going  through  any  marriage 
ceremony.  It  was  from  these  daughters  of  kings  that 
the  people  expected  an  heir  to  the  throne,  and  they 
naturally  wanted  the  best  product  possible.  Un- 
restricted love  then  was  the  method  by  which  this 
result  was  obtained.  In  nearly  all  the  temples  the 
Orisha  to  which  it  is  dedicated  is  figured  as  a king, 
and  he  is  surrounded  by  the  principal  officers  of  his 
court.  What  more  natural  than  that  he  also  should 
have  daughters  to  propagate  his  divine  race  ? 

In  Bosman’s  description  of  the  Slave  Coast,  letter 
XIX,  he  writes  : — “The  women  who  are  promoted  to 
the  degree  of  priestesses,  though  some  of  them  perhaps 
were  but  slaves  before,  are  yet  as  much  respected  as 
the  priests,  or  rather  more,  insomuch  that  they  pride 
themselves  with  the  name  of  God’s  children  ; and  as  all 
other  women  are  obliged  to  a slavish  service  to  their 
husbands,  these  on  the  contrary  exert  an  absolute  sway 
over  them  and  their  effects,  living  with  them  perfectly 
according  to  their  arbitrary  will  and  pleasure  ; besides 
which,  their  husbands  are  obliged  to  show  them  so 
much  respect,  as  they  received  from  their  wives  before 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


I58 

their  becoming  priestesses,  which  is  to  speak  to  and 
serve  them  upon  their  knees.”  I do  not  think  that 
Bosman  is  quite  correct  when  he  says  that  these  girls 
were  perhaps  slaves. 

Coming  a little  nearer  home,  Ellis  in  his  Yoruba- 
speaking  People  (page  78),  writes  : — “ There  is  an 
annual  festival  to  Orisha  “ Oko,”  held  when  the 
yam  crop  is  ripe  and  all  then  partake  of  new  yams. 
At  this  festival  general  licence  prevails,  the  priestesses 
give  themselves  indiscriminately  to  all  the  male 
worshippers  of  the  god,  and  theoretically  every  man 
has  a right  to  sexual  intercourse  with  every  woman 
he  may  meet  abroad.”  I do  not  think  that  Ellis  is 
quite  right  in  saying  that  the  priestesses  give  them- 
selves indiscriminately  to  all  the  male  worshippers, 
at  any  rate  as  far  as  my  enquiries  go.  “ They,  as 
bride  daughters  of  the  Orisha,  cohabit  only  with 
those  whom  they  may  love  of  the  male  worship- 
pers.” It  is  a fact,  however,  that  on  these  feast 
days,  in  certain  large  towns,  indiscriminate  licence 
prevails  among  the  rest  of  the  people. 

There  are  two  Orishas  who  have  these  bride 
daughters  acting  as  priestesses,  Oke  and  Oko.1 

1 On  Orisa  Oko  Keribo  says,  in  his  pamphlet  published  August  22nd, 
1906,  pp.  26  and  27  : — 

“ His  name  was  ‘ Kubia.’  He  was  a king  and  a tyrant.  He  was 
poisoned  by  one  of  his  subjects  and  was  leprous.  His  people  thereafter 
built  him  a hut  in  the  farm  [oko],  and  as  he  was  reluctant  to  leave  home, 
kingly  reverence  was  promised  him  in  this  retreat.  This  promise  was 
fulfilled,  so  that  after  his  death  men  repair  thither  to  worship  him.  The 
white  and  red  marks  used  by  its  devotees  indicate  the  chalk  and  camwood 
he  is  in  the  habit  of  using  to  conceal  the  leprous  spots  in  their  initial 
stage.” 

In  a word,  according  to  this  tradition,  “ Orisha  Oko  ” was  a leprous  king. 


XVI 


SHANGO— OYA— OBA— OSHUN 


159 


Oke  and  Oko  as  farm  Orishas  are  worshipped  in 
the  outer  districts  without  any  of  these  phallic 
ceremonies.  But  at  the  yearly  festival  at  Ibadan 

and  Abeokuta  these  priest  daughters  exist.  It  is 

still  considered  a great  honour  to  the  family  to  get 
one  of  their  daughters  elected  to  the  office,  which 
is  hereditary  in  certain  families ; and  most  of  the 
members  of  the  family,  even  the  husband,  feel 
honoured  by  contributing  to  the  fund  to  cover  the 
expense  incurred. 

The  rites  connected  with  Oke  and  Oko  are 
evidently  intended,  as  Dr.  Frazer  has  pointed  out 
in  his  book,  “ Adonis,  Attis,  Osiris,”  to  ensure  the 
fruitfulness  of  the  ground  and  the  increase  of 

man  and  beast  on  the  principle  of  homoeopathic 
magic. 

In  an  interesting  discussion  in  the  African  Mail 
on  the  marriage  question  in  Africa,  a correspondent, 
signing  himself  “A  Negro  Lover  of  Consistency,” 

poured  out  the  vials  of  his  wrath  on  the  head  of 

the  departed  Col.  Ellis,  and  spoke  of  the  passage 
quoted  above  and  such  stories  about  the  African  as 
“spurious  bosh.”  I am  not  quite  prepared  to  credit 


On  the  same  god  F.  S.,  in  the  Nigerian  Chronicle  of  the  26th  of  March, 
says : — 

“ Orisha  Oko’s  name  was  ‘ Kubiya.’  His  first  occupation  was  to  catch 
wild  guinea  fowls  and  sell  them.  He  afterwards  became  a physician,  and 
was  such  an  extraordinary  man  that  his  powers  were  considered  super- 
natural. He  resided  in  a village  where  all  men  came  to  him,  for  he  was 
a very  skilful  medical  man  and  diviner.  He  was  called  Orisa-Oko 
[‘  Village  god  ’]  because  he  lived  in  a village.” 

Here  Orisha  Oko  was  originally  a trapper  and  guinea  fowl  seller  and 
ultimately  a physician. 


160  NIGERIAN  STUDIES  chap. 

this  “ Lover  of  Consistency  ” with  a proper  motive 
in  thus  attacking  a man  no  longer  able  to  defend 
himself,  whom  he  believed  to  be  a kind  of  enemy 
of  his  race,  but  I can  pity  him  as  the  product  of 
a spurious  form  of  Christianity  which  thinks  that 
by  hiding  the  past,  his  race  is,  in  some  magical 
way,  benefited.  He  is  like  that  son  full  of  false 
pride  who  is  ready  to  inherit  the  wealth  and  position 
his  father  has  left  him,  but  is  ashamed  of  his  humble 
origin.  Great  teachers  not  only  have  great  ideals 
to  which  they  lead  the  minds  of  their  disciples,  but 
they  also  know  all  about  the  past,  and  so  are  able 
to  warn  them  of  the  pitfalls  they  must  try  to  shun. 
The  best  way  to  learn  how  to  appreciate  the 
beauties  of  a purely  spiritual  religion  is  by  trying 
to  grasp  all  the  beauties  in  a natural  one.  The 
spiritual  simply  uplifts  and  fulfils  the  natural. 

When  these  two  great  festivals  were  first  instituted, 
it  must  be  remembered,  wars  between  village  and 
village,  town  and  town,  were  the  rule,  but  upon 
these  days  all  united,  and,  under  the  protection  of 
these  Orishas,  met  on  more  or  less  an  equal  footing. 
It  reminds  one  of  the  description  given  by  an  old 
Arabist  writer  of  the  Hajj  : — “ It  (the  festival) 
formed  the  rendezvous  of  ancient  Arabian  life. 
Here  came  under  the  protection  of  God  the  tribes 
and  clans  which  at  other  times  lived  apart,  and 
only  knew  peace  and  security  within  their  own 
frontiers.  Here  affairs  between  states  or  tribes 
were  transacted  and  adjusted.  Of  course  lively 
proceedings  and  dealings  went  on  between  indi- 


XVI 


SHANGO— OYA— OBA— OSHUN 


1 6 1 


viduals,  for  this  was  the  single  opportunity  when 
men  could  move  freely  in  and  out  among  one 
another  without  fear.  Here  slaves  are  bought  or 
redeemed,  acquaintances  made  and  courtships 
arranged  between  men  and  women  of  different 
tribes,  which  could  otherwise  never  be  carried  on.” 
The  difficulty  of  obtaining  wives  in  small  villages 
without  incest  is  one  of  the  possible  causes  of  the 
founding  of  these  farm  festivals.  We  must  all 
remember  the  difficulty  of  the  sons  of  Benjamin. 
‘Then  the  elders  of  the  congregation  said,  “How 
shall  we  do  for  wives  for  them  that  remain, 
seeing  that  the  women  are  destroyed  out  of 
Benjamin  ? ” 

“‘And  they  said,  “There  must  be  an  inheritance 
for  them  that  be  escaped  of  Bejamin,  that  a tribe 
be  not  destroyed  out  of  Israel.” 

“ ‘ Howbeit  we  may  not  give  them  wives  of  our 
daughters : for  the  children  of  Israel  have  sworn, 
saying,  “ Cursed  be  he  who  giveth  a wife  to 
Benjamin.” 

“‘Then  they  said,  “Behold  there  is  a feast  of  the 
Lord  in  Shiloh  yearly  in  a place  which  is  on  the 
north  side  of  Bethel,  on  the  east  side  of  the  high 
way  that  goeth  up  from  Bethel  to  Shechem,  and 
on  the  south  of  Lebonah.” 

“ ‘ Therefore  they  commanded  the  children  of 
Benjamin,  saying  “ Go  and  lie  in  wait  in  the  vine- 
yards ; and  see,  and  behold,  if  the  daughters  of 
Shiloh  come  out  to  dance  in  dances,  then  come 
out  of  the  vineyards,  and  catch  you  every  man  his 


M 


162 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


wife  of  the  daughters  of  Shiloh,  and  go  to  the  land 
of  Benjamin.” 

“‘And  the  children  of  Benjamin  did  so.  In  those 
days  there  was  no  king  in  Israel : every  man  did 
that  which  was  right  in  his  own  eyes.’  ” ” 

However  pure  and  good  the  intention  of  the 
founders  of  these  feasts  may  have  been  at  the  time 
of  their  inauguration,  it  is  certain  that  in  course  of 
ages  the  beauty  of  the  original  idea  was  lost  and 
they  possibly  became  the  orgiastic  festivals  in  this 
part  of  Africa  that  we  know  they  became  in  Greece 
and  Italy  in  days  gone  by.  And  now  that  peace 
reigns  here  and  roads  and  railways  are  opening 
the  country,  native  public  opinion  is  fast  siding 
against  all  that  is  evil  in  these  customs,  and  they  are 
once  again  assuming  their  true  aspect  in  the  form 
of  “prayers  for  rain  in  due  season,”  harvest  thanks- 
givings, and  agricultural  shows. 

The  Orisha  Oke  may  well  be  called  the  titular 
goddess  of  Ibadan.  When  the  chiefs  of  that  place 
were  asked  what  animal  or  sign  they  would  like 
as  an  emblem  to  figure  on  the  medals  to  be  given 
away  at  their  agricultural  show,  they  unanimously 
selected  Oke.  They  had  the  photograph  of  a fine 
looking  woman  taken,  her  breasts  exposed,  and 
her  arms  raised  towards  heaven,  as  if  to  welcome 
her  children.  A picture  of  fruitfulness.  She  is  the 
hill  Orisha,  connected  with  fire.  Her  festival  used 
to  be  held  when  the  land  was  at  its  driest  and 
rain  was  most  required  to  quench  its  thirst.  She 
would  appear  to  a man  in  a dream  and  tell  him 


XVI 


SHANGO— OYA— OBA— OSHUN 


163 

to  go  to  the  Bale  and  ask  him  to  fix  a day  for  the 
feast.  Perhaps  the  Bale  would  take  no  notice, 
and  then  she  would  visit  another  man  in  a dream 
and  ask  him  to  go.  If  the  Bale  hesitated  she 
threatened  to  send  fire  down  from  heaven  to  burn 
his  house  and  cause  him  a great  loss.  She  sometimes 
demanded  a man  as  a sacrifice,  sometimes  200  pigeons, 
sometimes  a bullock  or  a sheep.  Notice  would  be 
sent  round  to  all  the  villages  and  the  day  stated. 
Everyone  had  to  be  in  the  town  the  day  before 
the  date  fixed.  Anyone  coming  into  the  town 
on  the  day  of  the  festival  would  be  robbed  of  all 
he  might  be  bringing  with  him.  No  trade  was  done, 
and  the  Bale  threw  money  away  among  the  crowds 
of  people,  who,  in  bands  of  males  and  bands  of 
females  of  different  ranks  and  ages,  paraded  the  town, 
throwing  open  their  cloths  as  they  met  as  if  to 
invite  copulation.  Wives  told  their  husbands  that 
they  were  going  to  play  and  they  allowed  them  to  go, 
and  the  wives  picked  out  the  men  they  fancied  and 
cohabited  with  them.  Bands  of  women  passing  down 
the  streets  sang  : — 

Septeni  nascimur,  utinam  et  ipsa  septem  pariam  : 
Ido  niger  est,  uterus  penitus  ruber, 

Uterus  duobus  milibus  concharum  constat,  sed 
penis  quindecim  tantum  conchis. 

Eum  cui  penis  est  penem  condere  oportet,  quod 
uterum  medio  in  corpore  habeo. 

Foris  est  mater  olearii 
Foris  est  pater  olearii 
Filius  natu  maximus  olearii 


M 2 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


164 

Sub  porticu  dormit. 

Tollo  pannum  et  insero  : 

“ Kerekere  ” sonit,  etpenem  quaerere  os  uteri  sentio. 

At  the  foot  of  the  two  hills  from  which  Olokemeji 
takes  its  name  there  is  an  altar  to  Oke,  and  there 
is  a cavern  in  the  rocks  at  Abeokuta  in  which  Oke 
is  said  to  be  worshipped.  The  Egba  say  that 

if  they  were  defeated  in  war  they  could  retire  into 
this  cave  and  it  would  hermetically  seal  itself  up 
until  the  danger  were  passed. 

The  Orisha  Oko,  or  harvest  god,  whose  emblem  is 
an  iron  rod  and  who  has  the  title  of  “ eni  duru,”  or  the 
erect  person,  is  more  in  evidence  at  Abeokuta  than 
elsewhere.  His  festival  is  held  about  August.  His 
bride  daughters,  like  the  daughters  of  kings,  may 
cohabit  with  whom  they  please.  These  Iyawo  Orisha 
have  a red  and  white  mark  on  their  foreheads.  The 
office  is  hereditary,  but  when  the  mother  dies  I fa  is 
consulted  as  to  which  of  her  daughters  is  to  take  her 
place.  The  family  collects  from  £40  to  ^50  to  cover 
the  expenses  of  the  initiation  ceremony.  They  make 
a shed  in  the  bush  and  keep  the  girl  there  for  three 
months.  She  is  given  what  she  fancies,  and  feasting 
goes  on  all  the  time.  She  is  washed  every  day,  and 
the  marks  are  renewed  by  a male  and  a female 
attendant,  called  respectively  “ Baba  losha  and  Iya 
losha.”  After  three  months  they  wash  her  and  paint 
her  head,  arms  and  feet  red  and  white.  The  people 
then  sing  and  dance  around  her  and  prostrate  them- 
selves before  her  for  seven  days.  She  is  now  called 
Olu  Orisha  Oko. 


Sacred  Cave  at  Abeokuta. 


XVI 


SHANGO— OYA— OBA— OSHUN 


165 


From  the  fact  that  these  farm  Orishas  only  become 
phallic  in  the  great  centres  of  population,  I am 
inclined  to  think  that  this  phallic  worship  is  a develop- 
ment that  only  came  about  when  people  began  to  live 
in  large  towns,  where  great  feasts  were  held. 

Agbolo  had  referred  me  to  one  Odedaino  as  an 
expert  on  the  marriage  question,  so  to  him  I went  for 
enlightenment  on  this  burning  topic.  He  said  they 
knew  a girl  was  ready  for  marriage,  as  then  she  first 
had  her  menses  (aseh).  Girls  were  given  in  marriage 
sometimes  as  babies.  Two  families  wished  to  be 
drawn  together,  and  they  agreed  that  their  children 
should  intermarry.  A boy  or  a man  took  a fancy  to  a 
child  and  asked  the  parents  through  his  parents  for 
their  child  in  marriage.  The  first  thing  the  father  of 
the  girl  did  was  to  consult  Ifa.  Ifa’s  priest  (Babalawo) 
having  been  called  in,  he  proceeded  to  divine  as 
explained  in  the  chapter  on  Ifa.  Then  if  “ Eji  ogbe  ” 
turns  up,  the  engagement  may  take  place  ; but  if  Osa 
or  Ofu  turn  up,  the  Orisha  not  being  in  its  favour, 
the  application  is  not  accepted.  If  the  Orisha  is  pro- 
pitious, the  boy  presents  the  parents  with  nine  yams 
and  100  heads  of  corn,1  and  repeats  this  offering 
yearly.  He  also  makes  a sacrifice  to  Ifa.  At  the 
proper  time  the  boy  presents  himself  before  the 
parents  of  the  girl  and  says,  “ Now  she  is  ready,  give 
her  to  me.” 

The  parents  again  consult  Ifa,  who  may  put  off  the 
marriage  for  a year. 

In  the  olden  days  marriages  took  place  at  the 
1 This  present  appears  to  vary  in  different  districts. 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


1 66 

beginning  of  the  rains,  but  as  there  was  very  little 
food  in  the  house  at  that  season  the  time  was  changed 
to  the  time  of  the  harvest  of  the  new  yams,  which  was 
a time  of  great  rejoicing  (Orisha  Oko),  and  the  second 
planting  season.  When  the  parents  have  given  their 
consent,  and  the  young  man  has  come  to  claim  his 
bride,  he  must  sacrifice  to  his  Orisha : and  on  the 
day  of  his  marriage  he  must  sacrifice  to  his  bride’s 
Orisha.  The  parents  give  their  daughter  a white 
handkerchief  and  take  her  to  the  bridegroom’s  house. 
She  is  dressed  in  costly  clothes,  beautiful  beads  around 
her  neck  and  waist,  silver  chains  around  her  neck,  and 
rings  on  her  fingers.  As  she  is  supposed  to  be  a 
maiden,  plenty  of  rum  and  kola  is  presented.  On  the 
third  day  the  wife  goes  back  to  her  parents  and  takes 
the  white  handkerchief  with  her.  If  it  has  blood  on  it 
all  is  well,  but,  if  not,  she  is  asked  to  say  who  seduced 
her.  The  seducer  has  then  to  give  damages  to  the 
would-be  husband,  who  may  refuse  to  acknowledge 
her  as  his  wife.  The  chiefs  on  the  husband’s  side 
settle  the  amount  of  damages.  If,  on  the  other  hand, 
all  is  well,  then  they  worship  the  Orisha  called  Ori 
(head)  and  the  girl  becomes  the  young  man’s  wife. 
And  if  after  a time  she  does  not  conceive,  they  give 
her  medicine  called  “ Idadure,”  and  they  ask  the  girl’s 
Orisha  to  help  them,  and  if  this  fails  they  then  say  it 
is  the  fault  of  the  man,  and  they  give  him  another  girl 
so  as  to  prove  it.  And  if  the  latter  does  not  conceive 
then  they  are  sure  that  it  is  the  man’s  fault.  They 
next  ask  him  to  take  medicine,  and,  after  a certain 
time,  if  neither  of  the  girls  conceive,  they  take  them 


XVI 


SHANGO— OYA— OBA— OSHUN 


167 


away,  and  the  man  who  eventually  marries  the  girl 
pays  back  the  dowry  to  the  sterile  would-be  husband. 
From  the  time  of  marriage  to  the  time  of  birth  there 
are  no  Orisha  ceremonies,  but  when  the  child  is  born 
they  ask  the  priest  to  what  Orisha  they  owe  this  good 
fortune,  and  when  he  tells  them  they  sacrifice  to  it. 
Three  days  after  the  birth  they  call  in  the  priest  and 
ask  him  to  name  the  child’s  “ Ese  entele  ” or  foot- 
prints. The  Babalawo  consults  Ifa,  who,  as  the  priest 
mentions  an  Orisha,  shakes  his  head  until  that  which 
is  to  become  the  guardian  spirit  of  the  child  is  men- 
tioned. The  child,  as  soon  as  it  is  able,  fetches  water 
for  this  Orisha  and  sacrifices  to  it  on  all  great  occasions 
during  its  life.  If  Obatala  is  the  Orisha  then  the 
child  must  wear  white  and  must  not  drink  palm  wine 
nor  eat  dog.  The  grand-parents  as  well  as  the  parents 
on  the  safe  delivery  of  their  child  each  thank  their 
separate  Orishas.  The  priest  gives  the  mother 
medicine  for  the  preservation  of  the  child.  If  it  be 
a girl,  a name  is  given  to  it  on  the  seventh  day,  if  a 
boy,  on  the  ninth. 

Except  that  it  is  never  done  in  the  dry  season,  and 
generally  before  the  tenth  year,  there  is  no  special  time 
for  circumcision  of  the  boy,  or  the  excision  of  the 
girl’s  clitoris,  but  the  ceremony  is  performed  when  the 
child  is  in  good  health,  and  it  is  marked  with  its  tribal 
marks  on  the  same  day. 

Bosman  in  his  description  of  the  Kingdom  of  Benin, 
which  is  an  offspring  of  the  Yoruba,  says  : “ Eight  or 
fourteen  days  after  the  birth  of  their  children,  both 
male  and  females  are  circumcised,  the  former  are 


1 68 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


thereby  bereft  of  their  prepuce  and  the  latter  of  their 
clitoris,  besides  which  they  make  small  incisions  all 
over  the  bodies  of  the  infants,  in  a sort  of  regular 
manner  expressing  some  figures  thereby.” 

Bala  Mimi,  who  accompanied  Odedaino  when  this 
information  was  given  to  me,  told  me  that  the  only 
marriage  Orishas  born  of  Yemoja  were  Shango  and 
his  wives  Oya,  Oba  and  Oshun,  while  Dada,  Shango’s 
brother,  otherwise  called  Bayoni,  was  rather  an  Orisha 
of  birth. 

Ellis  gives  us  a very  good  description  of  the  Orisha 
Shango  ; he  says : “He  dwells  in  the  clouds  in  an 
immense  brazen  palace,  where  he  maintains  a large 
retinue  and  a great  number  of  horses.”  The  Oni- 
Shango  or  priests  of  Shango  in  their  chants  always 
speak  of  Shango  as  hurling  stones,  and  whenever  a 
house  is  struck  by  lightning  they  rush  in  a body  to 
pillage  it  and  to  find  the  stone,  which,  as  they  take  it 
with  them  secretly,  they  always  succeed  in  doing.  A 
chant  of  the  Oni-Shango  very  commonly  heard  is  : — 
“ Oh,  Shango,  thou  art  the  master.  Thou  takest  in  thy 
hand  thy  fiery  stones,  to  punish  the  guilty  and  satisfy 
thy  anger.”  Everything  that  they  strike  is  destroyed. 
Their  fire  eats  up  the  forest,  the  trees  are  broken 
down,  and  all  living  creatures  are  slain,  and  the  lay 
worshippers  of  Shango  flock  into  the  streets  during  a 
thunderstorm  crying  : — “ Shango,  Shango,  great  King. 
Shango  is  the  Lord  and  Master.  In  the  storms  he 
hurls  his  fiery  stones  against  his  enemies,  and  their 
track  gleams  in  the  midst  of  the  darkness.”  “ May 
Shango’s  stone  strike  you,”  is  a very  common  form  of 


XVI 


SHANGO— OYA— OBA— OSHUN 


169 

imprecation.  He  usually  goes  armed  with  a club 
called  Oshe,  made  of  the  wood  of  the  ayan  tree,  which 
is  so  hard  that  a proverb  says  : — “ The  ayan  tree 
resists  the  axe.” 

His  male  followers  are  called  Odushushango  and 
the  female  Esin  nla  (the  great  horse). 

I happened  to  meet  an  Odushushango,  named 
Idowu,  who  gave  me  the  following  information. 
Jakuta  is  the  name  of  Shango’s  day.  Shango  is 
the  Alafin  of  Oyo’s  great  Orisha  and  is  sometimes 
called  Oba  Kuso,  the  king  of  Kuso,  a hill  near  Oyo 
which  is  sacred  to  him. 

Another  name  is  Alada  Ogun,  the  one  who  splits 
the  mortar  that  Ogun  is  said  to  wear  on  his  head. 
Ako  aja  abinrinja  lese,  the  ako  dog  that  walks 
as  one  about  to  fight.  Aja  jumoni  koto  kpanije, 
the  one  who  frightens  one  before  he  kills  and  eats 
him.  Olilu  tun  ilu  re  she,  one  who  puts  his  town 
in  order.  Ebi  ti  ka  waw  ponyin  shoro,  the  one  who 
with  his  hands  behind  his  back  does  him  an  injury. 
Akuwarapa  abija  kaka,  the  one  who  has  fits  and 
is  extraordinarily  strong. 

His  wife  Oya1  is  she  who  runs  on  ahead 
when  Shango  goes  out  to  fight,  the  strong  tornado 
wind. 

Oshun  is  the  gathering  darkness  and  Oba  the 
wild  clouds  that  meet.  These  two  stay  at  home 
to  keep  house. 

They  sacrifice  the  cow,  the  sheep  and  the  cock 

1 Oya  is  said  to  be  the  river  spirit  of  the  river  Niger,  and  Bishop 
Crowther  describes  her  as  the  wife  of  Thunder. 


170 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


to  Shango.1  His  sacred  tree  is  the  Ayan  from 
which  his  staff  is  made.  His  ewaws  are  the 
Sese  (beans),  the  Eligidi  (pumpkin),  the  Esuro 
(antelope),  the  Ekun  (rabbit),  and  the  Eku  ago 
or  white-bellied  rat  which  the  Alafin  of  Oyo  is 
seen  at  times  to  raise  to  his  lips  as  if  to  kiss. 

Two  days  after  my  visit  to  Akure,  where  I saw 
the  people  preparing  to  worship  Eshu  while  at  Ipetu, 
just  after  I had  finished  talking  to  the  chiefs,  dancers, 
singers  and  drummers,  followed  by  a crowd,  came 
prancing  to  my  tent,  in  a cloud  of  dust,  and  I was 
informed  that  the  followers  of  Shango  were  preparing 
to  hold  their  feast.  So  in  this  district  the  feast 
of  Shango  follows  close  after,  or  about  the  same 
time  as,  that  of  Ifa.  A very  tall  and  graceful  looking 
woman,  a priestess  of  Shango,  closely  followed  by 
a man,  both  rattling  some  seeds  in  a long-necked 
gourd,  and  three  or  four  women  attendants,  commenced 
dancing  in  front  of  my  tent.  They  said  this  woman 
represented  Shango.  She  was  dressed  in  a blouse 
of  a dark  colour  and  skirt  of  white.  Over  this 
skirt,  hanging  from  her  waist,  she  wore  pieces  of 
cloth  and  velvet  six  inches  in  width,  and  perhaps 
two  feet  in  length.  Her  hair  was  dressed  in  a series 
of  rolls  running  from  her  forehead  to  the  back  of 

1 Shango — -Bishop  Johnson  says  that  he  is  a deity  imported  from  the 
Niger.  Col.  Ellis  says  he  is  the  son  of  Yemoja,  the  daughter  of  Odudua 
and  Obatala.  Oja  called  him  the  son  of  Oranyan.  As  pointed  out  by 
Idowa,  Kuso  near  the  town  of  Oyo  is  where  Shango  has  his  sacred  grove. 
Mr.  E.  P.  Cotton  in  his  report  on  the  Egba  boundary  says  that  Shango 
was  the  fourth  king  or  Alafin  of  the  Yoruba.  According  to  the  Ibadan 
hunter,  Alara  (the  owner  of  thunder),  was  one  of  the  16  sons  of 
Oranyan. 


XVI 


SHANGO— OYA— OBA— OSHUN 


171 


her  head,  the  largest  being  near  the  crown  of  her 
head.  I was  told  that  she  was  collecting  money 
towards  the  expenses  of  the  coming  feast.  Generally 
seventeen  days’  notice  are  given,  so  that  the  feast 
of  Shango  in  these  parts,  it  will  be  noted,  takes 
place  at  the  beginning  of  the  tornado  season. 
During  the  festival  the  Odushushango  dance,  carrying 
pots  of  fire  on  their  heads,  and  this  fire  they  say 
cannot  be  quenched  by  water.  The  hair  of  these 
men  is  allowed  to  grow  long  and  is  arranged  like 
a woman’s.  Although  this  of  course  gives  them 
an  effeminate  appearance  I am  not  able  to  attach 
any  homosexual  act  to  the  custom.  They  certainly 
are  credited  with  magical  powers  and  they  are  rather 
honoured  than  hated. 


Shango 

Told  by  Mr.  Pellegrin 

Shango  is  a man  like  myself,  and  when  young 
could  not  be  controlled  by  his  parents,  so  they  left 
him  to  his  rascality.  He  used  to  waylay  people 
on  the  roads  and  kill  them,  so  all  the  Orishas  (201) 
tried  to  find  him,  each  giving  one  man.  They 
heard  he  was  at  Egbe.  They  met  him  there.  He 
said  he  was  tired  of  running  away,  he  would  see 
what  they  could  do.  Ogun  said  he  would  catch 
him,  so  he  took  his  pincers  and  ran  after  him ; 
then  Shango  sent  Thunder  against  him,  but  Ogun 
caught  her  in  his  pincers.  Shango  said  he  could 
not  allow  anyone  to  catch  him,  so  he  left  his  bow 


172 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


at  Egbe,  and  ran  away.  So  he  is  called  “ Oja  ja 
forun  ti  l’egbe,”  the  man  who  fought  greatly  and 
left  his  bow  at  Egbe.  Then  all  the  201  repre- 
sentatives went  and  told  Odudua,  their  chief.  Then 
Odudua  ordered  them  to  go  back  and  catch  him. 
They  went,  but  he  told  them  that  they  would  not 
see  him  again,  and  he  took  a chain  and  knocked 
the  earth,  and  it  opened  and  he  went  below.  He 
said  they  would  hear  of  him  for  ever.  Then  they 
returned  to  tell  Odudua,  and  he  said  as  Shango 
had  left  the  earth  he  was  glad.  Odudua  took  the 
Thunder  from  Ogun,  and  gave  him  a sword  to  kill 
anyone  who  came  his  way.  Then  they  met  to 
arrange  who  should  go  on  earth  to  repair  the  damage 
Shango  had  done,  and  they  elected  Truth.  And 
when  he  arrived  he  began  to  use  his  influence. 
When  a child  died  he  visited  the  parents  and  told 
them  that  as  human  beings  they  would  all  die. 
This  kind  of  comfort  they  did  not  care  for,  so  they 
sent  to  Odudua,  and  told  him  that  Truth  did  not 
agree  with  them,  so  Odudua  took  Truth  away  from 
them.  He  asked  them  which  Orisha  they  wanted, 
and  they  said  the  Iro  (lie),  who  made  images  and 
carved  eyes,  nose,  ears,  mouth  : they  said  he  would 
have  sense  to  rule  over  them.  Odudua  gave  them 
Iro  to  rule  them.  And  when  one  falls  sick  and 

goes  to  him  he  tells  them  to  gather  such  and  such 

a leaf,  and  make  medicine  and  take  it,  and  the  fever 
will  go  away.  If  he  hears  anyone  fighting  he  hears 
both  sides,  and  settles  it.  When  they  saw  that 

matters  went  well  with  them  like  this,  the  chief 


XVI 


SHANGO— OYA-OBA— OSHUN 


J73 


of  them  was  called  “Ajalorun”  (See  Ifa) — one 
who  fights  in  heaven.  This  Ajalorun  sent  to  Odudua 
and  asked  that  the  name  of  Iro  should  be  changed  to 
Orishala.  Ajalorun  and  Odudua  are  of  the  same 
mother,  Ajalorun  being  the  younger.  Ajalorun 
called  Iro  Orishala,  alaba  la  she,  iku  pa  ni  pori. 
(Orishala  means  the  great  Orisha,  Alabalashe,  one 
who  commands  [the  Balogun],  Iku  pa  ni  pori, 
Death  kills  us  and  kills  the  head).  Then  Orishala 
began  to  reign  in  the  world,  and  made  eyes,  nose, 
mouth,  ears,  head,  etc.,  for  them  all.  And  then 
the  people  began  to  hear  Shango  in  heaven. 


Shango 

Told  by  Solako 

Shango  is  Odudua’s  son  and  a rascal,  and  he  ran 
away.  Then  Odudua  sent  to  Oshala  and  Ogun,  his 
sons,  to  find  out  the  truth  about  Shango.  And  they 
fought  with  him,  but  they  could  not  catch  him  ; so 
they  told  Odudua.  He  used  to  cut  a leaf  and  chew 
it,  and  then  fire  came  out  of  his  mouth,  and  people 
ran  away.  Then  Odudua  called  a meeting,  and  asked 
who  would  catch  him,  and  Ogun  volunteered.  He 
met  him  at  Egbe.  They  fought : he  left  his  bow 
there,  and  went  to  Kuso.  Then  they  went  to  tell 
Odudua,  and  he  said  they  must  catch  him,  and  so 
they  went  to  Kuso,  and  Shango  said  he  would  not 
see  them.  He  threw  his  chain  to  heaven,  and  it 
opened  for  him,  and  he  disappeared.  And  there  he 


*74 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


thundered  and  lightened,  and  everyone  began  to 
worship  him. 

Oshun 

Told  by  Shotundi  of  Abeokuta 

Oshun  is  a woman  slave  of  one  Oshunmakide,  whose 
name  before  being  bought  was  Omujo.  She  then 
became  Oshunmakide’s  second  wife.  The  master  first 
asked  her  what  she  could  do,  and  she  answered  that 
the  only  thing  she  knew  how  to  do  was  to  dance,  so 
he  called  her  Omujo.  And  he  allowed  her  to  dance, 
and  while  doing  so  she  displayed  magical  powers 
by  changing  her  dress  in  the  presence  of  everyone 
instantaneously.  When  the  first  wife  saw  this,  think- 
ing that  her  husband  would  love  Omujo  more  than 
her,  one  day  as  she  was  dancing  she  used  some  charm 
and  turned  her  into  water.  Then  the  husband  and 
the  people,  thinking  that  this  was  part  of  her  per- 
formance, waited,  expecting  her  to  resume  her  position 
as  a woman.  And  when  this  did  not  occur  the 
husband  wept  bitterly,  and  all  the  people  went  home. 
Afterwards  the  husband  married  another  woman,  and 
she  bore  him  no  children ; then  he  went  to  the  Baba- 
lawo  and  asked  how  this  was?  And  he  said,  “You 
have  got  a woman  that  became  water,  and  so  the 
new  wife  must  worship  water  before  she  can  have  a 
child ; and  they  must  call  the  water  Oshun.1  And 
when  worshipping  it  she  must  call  out  ‘ Omujo  logun 
rora  gungoke,  rora  gun  okuta  : ’ O dancer  warrior ! 

1 Oshun  is  one  of  the  principal  rivers  in  Yorubaland. 


XVI 


SHANGO— OYA— OBA— OSHUN 


l75 


go  gently  up  the  hill,  go  gently  up  the  rock.”  And 
the  wife  worshipped  Oshun  in  this  way,  and  had 
children. 


The  Ewaw  of  the  Yoruba. 

J.  G.  Frazer,  in  an  article,  “ Howitt  and  Fison,”  in 
“Folk  Lore,”  Vol.  XX.,  No.  2,  page  179,  referring 
to  the  Australian  class  system  says : “ But  if  the 
system  was  devised  to  prevent  the  marriage  of 
brothers  with  sisters,  of  parents  with  children,  and 
of  a man’s  children  with  his  sister’s  children,  it  seems 
to  follow  that  such  marriages  were  common  before 
the  system  was  instituted  to  check  them  ; in  short, 
it  implies  that  exogamy  was  a deliberate  prohibition 
of  a former  unrestricted  practice  of  incest,  which 
allowed  the  nearest  relations  to  have  sexual  inter- 
course with  each  other.  This  implication  is  confirmed, 
as  Messrs.  Howitt,  Spenser  and  Gillen  have  shown 
for  the  tribes  of  central  Australia,  by  customs  which 
can  be  reasonably  interpreted  only  as  a system  of 
group  marriage  or  as  survivals  of  a still  wider  prac- 
tice of  sexual  communism.  And  as  the  custom  of 
exogamy  combined  with  the  classificatory  system  of 
relationship  is  not  confined  to  Australia,  but  is  found 
among  many  races  in  many  parts  of  the  world,  it 
becomes  probable  that  a large  part,  if  not  the  whole, 
of  the  human  race  have  at  one  time,  not  necessarily 
the  earliest,  in  their  history  permitted  the  practice  of 
incest,  that  is,  of  the  closest  interbreeding,  and  that 
having  perceived  or  imagined  the  practice  to  be  in- 
jurious, they  deliberately  forbade  and  took  effective 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


I76 

measures  to  prevent  it.”  According  to  information 
I have  received,  incest  is  still  common  in  the  Ibibio 
districts  of  Southern  Nigeria,  but  any  such  practice 
has  been  more  or  less  stamped  out  in  the  Yoruba 
country  by  the  system  of  “ Ewaw  ” evidently  instituted 
by  the  priests  of  I fa  for  that  purpose,  and  now  incest 
is  connected  in  their  minds,  as  a system,  only  on  the 
occasion  of  the  festivals  of  the  farm  Orishas  already 
mentioned.  It  is  true  that  on  the  death  of  the  father 
the  son  is  given  one  or  more  of  his  father’s  wives,  but 
generally  one  who  has  not  had  children,  the  other 
wives  being  sometimes  distributed  among  the  other 
relations. 

On  the  third  day  after  the  child  is  born  the  Ifa 
priest  is  called  in  to  give  the  child  its  “ Orisha 
and  its  ewaws.”  The  Orisha  is  the  child’s  object 
of  worship,  and  it  may  not  marry  one  of  the  op- 
posite sex  having  the  same  Orisha,  which  thus 
becomes  its  chief  “ ewaw.”  This  Orisha  holds  good 
as  a family  deity  and  ewaw  for  four  generations, 
that  is  to  say  if  the  Orisha  has  been  given  anew 
to  the  child  then  it  will  be  his  son’s,  his  grandson’s, 
and  his  great-grandson’s.  His  son  then  takes  as  his 
second  ewaw  his  father’s  wife’s  animal  ewaw.  This 
one’s  son  takes  his  father’s  wife’s  third  or  vegetable 
ewaw.  And  the  latter’s  son  takes  his  father’s  wife’s 
fourth  omen  ewaw,  i.e.  a rat,  bird,  or  snake. 

The  daughters  take  the  father’s  Orisha,  but,  as 
the  African  says,  if  you  wish  to  catch  a rat  you 
must  go  to  its  hole,  or,  in  other  words,  in  this  case  we 
must  begin  at  the  beginning. 


XVI 


SHANGO— OYA— OBA— OSHUN 


177 


The  Yoruba  divide  people  into  six  double  or 
twelve  single  groups.  The  Fisherman,  male  and 
female.  Fish,  snakes,  and  birds,  or  omens,  male 
and  female.  The  Hunter,  male  and  female. 
Animals,  male  and  female.  Farmers,  male  and 
female.  Plants,  male  and  female.  In  all  six 
brothers  and  sisters,  and  all  were  of  one  family. 

In  the  beginning  brother  married  sister,  or,  in 
their  words,  eat1  one  another.  For  the  sake  of 
brevity  we  will  number  each  of  the  six  groups, 
and  call  each  brother  and  sister  by  a letter.  The 
Fisherman  a,  his  sister  b,  the  group  1.  The  Omens, 
male  c and  female  d,  the  group  2.  The  Hunter, 
male  e and  female  f,  group  3.  The  Animals,  male 
G,  female  h,  group  4.  The  Farmer,  male  1,  female 
j,  group  5.  Plants,  male  k,  female  l,  group  6. 

No.  1.  No.  2.  No.  3.  No.  4.  No.  5.  No.  6. 

AB  CD  EF  GH  IJ  KL 

But  they  soon  got  tired  of  this  single  diet,  and  the 
male  product  of  ab  caught  the  female  product  of 
cd  ; ef  of  gh  ; and  so  on. 

ABD  CDB  EFH  GHF  IJL  KLJ 

Even  then  they  were  not  satisfied,  and  so  the 
fisherman  made  war  on  the  hunter,  and  the  hunter 
on  the  farmer,  and  the  farmer  on  the  fisherman, 
and  each  appropriated  the  product  of  the  other’s 
labour.  And  the  result  was  that  the  fisherman 


1 Je  is  to  eat,  dine  ; owe  ; deserve  ; gain  ; earn  ; win. 


N 


178  NIGERIAN  STUDIES  chap. 

eat  flesh,  the  hunter  eat  vegetables  and  the  farmer 
eat  fish. 

ABDF  CDBH  EFHJ  GHFL  IJLB  KLJD 

Reprisals  were  made,  and  the  fisherman  took 
vegetables,  the  farmer  flesh,  and  the  hunter  fish. 

ABDFJ  CDBHL  EFHJB  GHFLD  IJLBF  KLJDH 

This  could  not  go  on,  so  they  called  a great 
palaver,  and  finally  agreed  that  they  would  give 
their  daughters  in  marriage  to  one  another,  and 
now  the  priests  see  that  there  is  no  confusion  nor 
disorder.  While  the  wife  shall  be  allowed  to 
worship  her  Orisha  it  shall  not  be  inherited  by  the 
son  unless  the  Babalawo  says  it  is  time.  By  this 
the  letters  b d f h j l,  as  Orishas,  drop  out,  but 
their  blood  remains  as  that  of  the  group  to  which 
it  belonged,  and  the  ewaws  stand 

ADFJ  CBHL  EHJB  GFLD  ILBF  KJDH 

Each  person’s  ewaws  shall  in  future  be  composed  of 
one  Orisha,  one  omen,  one  animal,  and  one  plant. 
Each  shall  continue  in  the  family  for  four  genera- 
tions, and  shall  then  be  renewed.  Thus  a c e g i k 
now  drop  out,  and  a male  Orisha  is  needed  to 
complete  the  ewaws.  Number  one  or  its  product 
adfj  can  intermarry  with  Number  two  family,  because 
their  ewaws  are  all  different : a and  c may  therefore 
enter  each  other’s  group  : e and  g may  exchange  : 1 
and  k also. 

The  families  are  now  thus  represented  : 

DFJC  BHLA  HJBG  FLDE  LBFK  JDHI 


XVI 


SHANGO— OYA— OBA— OSHUN 


179 


The  next  generation  the  letters  d b h f l j. 
Number  one  is  now  in  want  of  fish,  so  he  marries  b 
of  group  No.  2. 

Number  2 wants  fish,  and  takes  d. 

Number  3 wants  an  animal,  so  he  takes  f. 

Number  4 wants  an  animal  and  takes  h. 

Number  5 wants  a plant,  and  takes  j. 

Number  6 wants  a plant,  so  takes  l. 

The  families  now  stand 

FJCB  HLAD  JBGF  LDEH  BFKJ  DHIL. 

The  letters  fhjlbd  now  drop  out. 

Number  one  is  now  short  of  an  animal,  so  he 
marries  h. 

Number  2 wants  an  animal,  so  takes  h. 

Number  3 needs  a plant,  so  takes  l. 

Number  4 wants  a plant,  so  takes  j. 

Number  5 desires  fish,  so  takes  d. 

Number  6 needs  fish,  and  takes  b. 

The  groups  now  stand  jcbh  ladf  bgfl  dehj  fkjd 
hilb. 

And  now  jlbdfh  drop  out. 

The  male  Orishas  are  now  again  to  the  fore  : the 
groups  stand 

CBHL  ADFJ  GFLD  EHJB  KJDH  ILBF 

Now  there  are  said  to  be  201  Orishas,  and  if  for  the 
sake  of  argument  we  say  that  100  of  these  are  male, 
you  will  see  that  there  is  ample  scope  for  an  enormous 
variation.  There  are  also  many  omens,  animals,  and 
plants  in  use  as  marriage  ewaws,  as  the  list  given 


N 2 


i8o 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


below  shows.  I may  say  at  once  that  their  practice 
does  not  apparently  agree  with  this  theory.  Pre- 
sumably the  groups  mentioned  acknowledged  Olokun, 
Olosa,  Ogun,  Oshowsi,  Oke,  and  Oko  as  their  Orishas, 
and  so  group  No.  i is  a male  group,  No.  2 a female, 
No.  3 a male,  No.  4 a female,  No.  5 a male,  and  No.  6 
a female. 

Such  is,  more  or  less,  the  idea  that  guides  the 
Babalawos  in  their  choice  of  Orishas  and  ewaws,  but 
as  we  know  there  is  always  a vast  difference  between 
the  ideal  and  the  actual. 

A native  called  Shoremekun,  said  to  be  an  authority 
on  this  subject,  informed  me 

(1)  That  the  Orisha,  given  three  days  after  birth 
when  the  father  acknowledged  the  child  as  his  before 
all  the  world,  must  be  one  that  has  been  in  the  family. 

(2)  That  no  one  could  marry  anyone  of  the  opposite 
sex  who  might  have  the  same  Orisha. 

(3)  That  all  the  daughters  take  the  Orisha  of  the 
father. 

(4)  a.  That  he  may  not  marry  his  uncle  or  aunt’s 
“ Ebi,”  on  his  father’s  or  mother’s  side. 

(6)  He  may  not  marry  his  brother’s  or  sister’s 
“ Ebi.” 

(c)  That  by  Ebi  he  meant 

Omo  Iya  j , 

t>  i 1 his  father’s  and  mother’s  children. 

Omo  Baba 

Omomi  his  own  children. 

Omomome  his  grandchildren. 

Omolala  his  great-grandchildren. 


XVI  SHANGO— OYA— OB  A— OSHUN  181 

Then  he  said  that  he  had  taken  his  mother’s  Orisha, 
which  was  Shango,  and  that  his  eldest  son,  grandson, 
and  great  grandson  would  all  have  Shango  as  their 
Orisha. 

Next  he  went  on  to  say  that  his  father’s  name  was 
Osho,  and  that  his  wife’s  name  was  Elekude,  and  that 
her  Orisha  was  Orishako. 

His  grandfather’s  name  was  Nagulo,  and  his  Orisha 
was  Orishako 1 : he  married  Shabeyi,  whose  Orisha 
was  Beji.  His  own  wife’s  name  was  Moshalo,  and 
her  Orisha  was  Beji. 

He  had  three  brothers  Shashino,  whose  Orisha  was 
Ifa,  Akikumi,  whose  Orisha  was  also  Ifa,  and  Oje, 
whose  Orisha  was  Oro.  And  his  sons  were  Adikunle, 
whose  Orisha  was  Shango ; Adinakon,  a Christian 
who  had  no  Orisha ; Bamibopa,  a Mohammedan, 
whose  Orisha  used  to  be  Obatala,  and  Ladile,  whose 
Orisha  was  Obatala. 

His  daughters’  names  were  Shangoedi,  Adinoju, 
Aditutu,  and  Shuboola,  whose  Orisha  was  Shango. 

We  note  from  the  above  that  all  brothers  do  not 
take  the  same  Orisha.  Shoremekun’s  father  was  not 
the  eldest  son  of  his  grandfather,  and  therefore  did 
not  take  the  latter’s  Orisha.  Neither  was  Shoremekun 
the  son  of  his  father’s  first  wife  Elekude.  Shoremekun 
has  given  us  the  names  of  the  chief  wife  of  each  of  his 
ancestors  only. 

But  this  study  is  one  that  can  be  only  taken  up  by 
someone  who  has  unlimited  time  at  his  disposal,  and  I 
only  give  the  above  example  to  show  how  anyone, 
1 Orishako  is  in  full  Orisha  Oko. 


182 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


who  forgets  that  a native  may  have  any  number  of 
wives,  may  easily  find  sufficient  apparent  contradictions 
to  cause  endless  confusion  to  any  theory  he  may 
deduce  from  casual  observation. 

We  have  been  told  that  theoretically  each  person 
should  have  one  Orisha  and  three  ewaws  : well,  from 
the  following  list  you  can  form  your  own  opinion  as  to 
the  correctness  of  that  theory  or  the  present  existing 
confusion.  My  sympathy  is  entirely  with  the  patient 
priests  of  I fa,  whose  duty  it  now  is  to  enquire  into  the 
genealogies  of  all  newly-born  infants,  and  to  assign  to 
them  what  we  now  perhaps  look  upon  as  our  armorial 
bearings. 

In  the  following  lists  I give,  under  the  name  of  his 
Orisha,  first,  the  man’s  name,  secondly,  his  town, 
thirdly,  what  he  must  sacrifice  to  his  Orisha,  fourthly 
his  ewaws  or  things  forbidden  to  him,  and  fifthly, 
whether  he  may  marry  one  with  his  Orisha  or  not. 


Orisha  Ogun. 


Name. 

Town. 

Sacrifice. 

Ewos  or  Ewaws. 

Yes. 

No. 

Ogunkula 

Ijaiyi 

Dog,  beans 

Ground  nuts, 
Efaw,  awsawn, 
a vegetable, 
and  the  cricket 

I 

Alowani 

Offa. 

Dog,  beans 

May  not  eat  the 
sacrificed  dog, 
but  only  taste 
the  water  in 
which  it  has 
been  boiled. 
Efaw,  awsawn 
and  banana 

I 

XVI 


SHANGO— OYA— OBA— OSHUN 


183 


Orisha  Ogun .—Continued. 


Name. 

Town. 

Sacrifice. 

Ewos  or  Ewaws. 

Yes. 

No. 

Osho 

Abeokuta 

Dog,  bean 

bread,  pounded 
yams,  palm 
wine 

Snake,  the  leaf 
of  Ogunmo 

1 

Alabi 

Akure 

Dog,  palm  oil, 
salt 

None 

I 

Ajibola 

Ibadan 

Dog,  kola,  palm 
wine,  roasted 
and  pounded 
yams 

Fowls,  adultery 

I 

Ajala 

Ibadan 

Dog,  goat, 
sheep 

Fowls 

I 

Lanloyi 

Ogbomosho 

Dog 

Personal  Ewaw 
dog 

I 

Kale 

Awyan 

Dog,  beans,  all 
fried  things 

Ire  (Funtunsia 
Elastica) 

I 

Ogundipe 

Ogbomosho 

Dog,  corn, 
pigeon 

Ire 

I 

Aborishade 

Ijero 

Dog,  palm  wine 

None 

1 

Egun. 

Amodu 

Abeokuta 

Cock,  ram, 
beans 

Not  to  reveal 
secrets 

I 

Akiwanmi 

55 

Goat,  fowl 

(Red  monkey) 

Iji 

I 

Bayani  or  Bayoni. 


Badamosi 

Abeokuta 

Cow,  fowl,  palm 

Dog,  pig, 

oil,  yams 

roasted  yams, 
pito,  palm 

wine.  May 

not  carry  water 

184 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


I FA. 


Name. 

Town. 

Sacrifice. 

Ewos  or  Ewaws. 

Yes. 

No. 

Fumiwirji 

Akure 

Pig,  Goat,  Fowl, 
bandicoot 

Fish,  dog.  May 
not  carry  nor 
bail  water 

I 

Komolapi 

Ilesha. 

Pig,  goat,  fowls, 
bandicoot, 
pounded  yams 

Dog,  pig,  tete 
(vegetable) 

1 

Ojo 

Offa 

Goat,  fowl, 
bandicoot, 
tortoise 

Sheep,  oyo 
leaves,  banana 

I 

Alade 

Ibadan 

She  goat, 
pounded  yams 

Cock,  goat, 
Okro,  adultery 
on  the  wife’s 
part 

1 

Ojuola 

Oyo 

Pig,  goat,  fowl, 
pounded  yam 
and  b e a ns 
(egusi) 

Rats,  dry  fish, 
p a r t r i d ges, 
eggs,  ducks, 
efon  (veg.), 
palm  kernels 

I 

Makidi 

Abeokuta 

Goat,  fowl, 
pounded  yams 

Dog,  pig 

I 

Ashaolu 

Akure 

Goat,  bandicoot 
fish,  snail 

Igi,  Isin(no  fire) 

I 

Shotunde 

Abeokuta 

Goat,  fowl 

None 

? 

p 

Orisha  Oya  (Awya). 

Ige 

Offa 

Fowl,  pounded 
yams,  goat  and 
Ishapa  soup 

Sheep  and  cow 

I 

Makunde 

Ibadan 

Fowl,  goat, 
pounded  yams, 
pito  (beer) 

Sheep,  ram 

I 

Oyadeji 

Abeokuta 

Fowl,  pounded 
yams 

Sheep,  snail, 
elephant,  dog 

I 

XVI 


SHANGO— OYA— OBA— OSHUN 


185 


Orisha  Oya  (Awya )— Continued. 


Name. 

Town. 

Sacrifice. 

Ewos  or  Ewaws. 

Yes. 

No. 

Belo 

Abeokuta 

Fowl,  goat 

Sheep,  efo n 
antelope 

1 

Awyalola 

Ibadan 

Fowl,  goat, 
yams 

Sheep 

I 

Sumanu 

Ikirun 

Fowl,  goat,  kola 

Sheep 

I 

Adeoti 

Offa 

Fowl,  goat 

Sheep 

I 

Awyawerni 

Ikirun 

Fowl,  goat, 
pounded  yams 

Sheep,  beans 

I 

Abiawna 

Ibadan 

Fowl,  goat 

Sheep 

1 

Shango. 


I da  wo 

Ibadan 

Ram,  fowl 

Antelope 
(Eshuo),  rab- 
bit (Ekun), 
pigeon  pie 

I 

Lajidi 

Ijaiyi 

Ram,  fowl 

Antelope 
(Eshuo),  rab- 
bit (Ekun), 
rat  (Ago),  dog 

I 

Abidogun 

Ibadan 

Ram,  kola,  cold 
water 

Rat,  dog 

I 

Shangotola 

Abeokuta 

Dry  fish,  beans, 
yams 

Sheep,  hedge- 
hog, armadillo, 
antelope,  alli- 
gator, tortoise 

I 

Adeyauju 

Ibadan 

Ram 

Rat,  beans 
(sese),  ante- 
lope 

I 

Bangbola 

Ibadan 

Ram,  kola,  cock, 
yam 

Rat,  beans 
(sese) 

I 

Shangotayo 

Ram,  fowls,  kola 

Rat,  beans 
(sese) 

I 

1 86 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


Orishala,  Obatala,  Oshala,  Orishanla,  Oshanla. 


Name. 

Town. 

Sacrifice. 

Ewos  or  Ewaws. 

Yes. 

No. 

Olorishade 

Abeokuta 

Snail,  kola, 
yams,  fowl, 
goat,  ducks, 
pigeons 

Dog, palm  wine, 
may  not  use 
brass 

I 

Adeoye 

Ibadan 

Snail,  fowls, 
ducks,  pigeons, 
yams 

Dog,  palm  wine, 
tortoise 

I 

Laleye 

Ogbomosho 

Fowl,  yam, 
egusi  soup 

Salt,  palm  wine, 
palm  oil,  may 
not  sleep  on 
mat 

I 

Adelafun 

Ilorin 

Snail,  egusi, 
yam 

Salt,  palm  oil, 
palm  wine, 
pepper 

I 

Adeshiyan 

Ibadan 

Snail  cooked 
with  shea  but- 
ter, fowl 

Palm  wine,  corn 
wine  and  snuff 

I 

Adedoja 

Ikirun 

Snail,  fowl 

Palm  wine 

I 

Aborishade  1 

Ijero 

Snail,  goat, 
kola,  akara 

Dog,  palm  wine 

I 

Adeyola 

Ibadan 

Snail,  fowl,  Ori 

Palm  wine 

I 

Eshu. 

Momodu 

Otton 

Oshoybo 

He  goat 

Nut  oil,  onions, 
dog 

I 

Ojo 

Ede 

He  goat,  sheep 

Nut  oil,  dog 

I 

Adekunbi  1 

Iganna 

He  goat,  dog, 
pig 

Nut  oil 

I 

Odudua. 


Lowale 

Ife 

Sheep,  palm 

None 

I 1 

wine 

XVI  SHANGO— OYA— OBA— OSHUN  187 


Orisha  Oko,  Oshaoko. 


Name. 

Town. 

Sacrifice. 

Ewos  or  Ewaws. 

Yes. 

No. 

Akitundi 

Ijanji 

Dried  meat, 
egusi,  yams 

Antelope,  and 
may  not  eat 
new  yams  be- 
fore Oko’s 
festival 

I 

Obasa 

Ido 

Snail,  fish,  ekuru 
beans 

Butter  kola 

I 

Adekunbi 1 

Iganna 

Goat,  fowls,  fish, 
rat 

New  yams 

1 

Shankpana,  Shankpano,  Shakpana. 


Aminu 

Abeokuta 

Sheep,  beans, 

Yamati  seed, 

palm  oil 

tobacco,  not  to 
sit  on  mortar, 

head  not  to  be 
knocked. 

OSHUN. 


Salami 

Abeokuta 

Rats,  gala  (ante- 
lope), corn, 
yams,  palm  oil 

Etu  (antelope), 
fowl,  palm 
wine,  beans 

Oyiwopo 

Offa 

Goat,  fowls 

Pito  (corn  beer) 

Babatunde 

Abeokuta 

Goat,  fowls, 
beans,  youri 
(veg.) 

Pito,  snail,  ele- 
phant 

I 

Akande 

Ibadan 

Rabbit,  ante- 
lope, dry  fish, 
yams,  pito 

Rats,  he  goat, 
cocks,  snails, 
ducks,  ground 
corn],  water 
yams 

Tinuola 

Haro 

Corn  with  oil 

None 

I 

Adederan 

Ikirun 

Goat,  fowl 

Corn  wine 

I 

Kaiwo 

Ibadan 

IBEJI. 

Fowl,  beans, 
yams  and  oil, 
kola 

Monkey 

Kainde 

Oyan 

Ekuru  beans, 
all  fried  things 

Nut  oil,  Ire 
(Funturia  elas- 
tica) 

1 88  NIGERIAN  STUDIES  chap. 


Erinle. 


Name. 

Town. 

Sacrifice. 

Ewos  or  Ewaws. 

Yes. 

No. 

Ishola 

Ijaiyi 

Cock,  beans, 
butter,  kola, 
yam  flour, 
pounded  yams, 
agidi 

elephant  and 
hippo 

1 

ORI. 

Adeniji 

Abeokuta 

Fish,  beans 
(egusi) 

New  yams  be- 
fore the  Oko 
festival 

I 

Yemaja  or  Yemoja. 

Adeniran 

Ibadan 

Yams,  palm  oil, 
cooked  corn, 
yam  flour 

Dog,  alligator, 
unskinned 
roasted  beef 

I 

Abiara 1 

Ibadan 

Sheep,  fowl, 
snails 

Dog 

I 

Agba. 

Fabode1 

J Oyan 

Dog,  fowl,  goat 

Palm  wine, 
dried  okro 

i 

Aga. 

Fabode 1 

Oyan 

| Fowl  goat 

1 Ebolo  and  Odu 
herbs 

j i 

I 

Obaluaye. 

Abiara 1 

Ibadan 

I G o a t,  fo  w 1, 
snail 

Beniseed 

| I 

Okejemori. 

Oke 

| Ibadan 

| Snail,  fowl 

| Dog,  palm  wine  | | i 

Oro. 

Asani 

| Abeokuta 

| Ram,  corn  wine 

| Dog,  horse 

| I 

1 It  will  be  noted  that  some  people  now  have  two  Orishas. 

Many  in  these  lists  may  marry  women  who  have  their  Orishas,  but 
they  could  give  me  no  reason  for  this.  It  is  possible  that  certain  people  of 
royal  descent  may  marry  whom  they  like. 

In  Ibadan  I have  been  told  that  in  the  olden  times  twins  had  to  marry 
twins. 


XVI 


SHANGO— OYA— OBA— OSHUN 


189 


Orishas  of  Birth,  Life  and  Death 

We  have  left  to  us  the  Orishas  Oba,  Shankpana  and 
Dada,  whose  other  name  is  Bayoni  or  Bayani. 

Oba  or  Ibu  is  the  third  wife  of  Shango,  and  represents 
the  thunder  of  Shango,  the  meeting  of  the  clouds  and 
the  crying  out.  The  word  Ibu  also  means  the  one  who 
broils  or  bakes  under  ashes,  and  thus  this  Orisha  may 
be  said  to  be  the  wife  that  first  made  native  bread. 
But  I was  told  that  Oshun  was  the  woman  bread-maker. 
I am  inclined  to  think  that  there  has  been  some  con- 
fusion in  the  occupation  of  Shango’s  wives,  who  are 
said  to  stay  at  home,  as  the  meaning  of  Shango’s  third 
wife’s  name  so  evidently  points  to  Ibu  or  Oba  as  the 
bread-maker. 

About  Dada,  the  Orisha  of  Birth,  things  created  and 
vegetables,  we  know  very  little.  Ellis  tells  us  that  he 
is  represented  by  a calabash  ornamented  with  cowries, 
on  which  is  placed  a ball  of  Indigo. 

As  to  Shankpana  a story  tells  us  that  : — 

Erinle  and  Shankpana  are  offspring  of  Shango  and 
Oya.  Shankpana  was  a wicked  boy,  and  Erinle  was 
his  sister.  When  they  were  young  Erinle  used  to 
warn  him  not  to  be  cruel  to  people’s  children,  because 
he  was  accustomed  to  beat  them.  Shankpana  asked 
her  why  she  cared  for  other  people’s  children. 
Erinle  said  she  liked  to  have  plenty  of  companions 
to  play  with.  Shankpana  said  he  did  not  like  these 
crowds  of  children,  so  he  went  on  beating  them,  and 
made  the  parents  cry.  Then  she  went  and  told  her 
father,  Shango,  of  how  Shankpana  treated  children, 
and  Shango  sent  for  him  and  beat  him.  Shankpana 


190 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


then  said  he  would  revenge  himself  on  Erinle,  and 
when  he  next  saw  her  he  flogged  her  to  death,  and 
took  her  to  the  bank  of  a river,  and  buried  her  there. 
After  seventeen  days,  as  the  parents  had  not  seen 
Erinle,  they  began  to  search  for  her,  but  could  not 
find  her  ; and  Shankpana  said  nothing.  Then  they 
consulted  the  Babalawo,  and  he  told  them  that  Erinle 
had  been  killed  and  buried  on  the  bank  of  the  river, 
and,  as  she  died  for  her  love  of  children,  anyone  who 
wanted  children  must  worship  Erinle  on  the  bank  of 
the  river.  And  so  she  became  an  Orisha  to  be  wor- 
shipped on  the  bank  of  any  river. 

Erinle  means  elephant  that  flourishes  on  the  land. 
Elephant  is  something  that  is  great  and  loving. 

And  Shango  drove  Shankpana  into  the  bush,  and 
there  he  became  a mysterious  and  harmful  bushman, 
throwing  smallpox  and  sickness  about. 

“The  word  Shankpana  means  one  that  cuts  and 
kills  one  on  the  road.  Oba  was  his  real  name — a title 
given  to  him  as  one  wrho  should  look  after,  and  be  a 
leader  among,  children.” 

We  have  now  connected  all  the  children  of  Yemoja 
with  all  the  occupations1  of  the  primitive  Yoruba,  and 
as  we  were  led  to  expect  they  fall  into  their  places 
under  the  six  or  seven  great  categories. 

(1)  Dada  things  made,  created,  birth,  etc. 

(2)  Water  the  fisherman  and  his  Orishas, 

Olosa  and  Olokun. 

1 It  must  be  remembered  that  Ifa  is  said  to  have  chosen  his  disciples, 
or  councillors,  from  all  parts  of  the  country.  The  fact  of  his  having 
chosen  Olokun  and  Olosa  proves  that  the  dwellers  by  the  sea  must  have 
been  included. 


XVI 


SHANGO— OYA— OBA— OSHUN 


191 

(3)  Earth  the  hunter  and  Oshowsi  and 

Ogun. 

(4)  Fire  and  mar-  the  priest  farmer,  and  Oke  and 

riage  Shango. 

(5)  Motion  and  the  farmer  and  first  harvest,  and 

conception  Oshun  and  Oko. 

(6)  Energy, Weight  women  and  all  the  people,  and 

Pregnancy  Oya  and  Ajeshaluga. 

(7)  Life  and  Death,  all  folk,  and  Oba  and  Shank- 

Suffering  pana. 

Thus  these  Orishas  in  their  order  and  meaning 
agree  with  the  Odus  or  sacred  palm  nuts  in  the  order 
given  to  me  by  the  priest  Oliyitan.  These  categories 
also  are  thus  identical  with  those  I discovered  to  be 
at  the  back  of  the  mind  of  the  Bavili  in  the  Congo. 
And  the  heavenly  and  earthly  forms  of  Government, 
office  for  office,  or  rather  official  for  Orisha,  also 
coincide.  And  as  the  occupations  of  the  Yoruba  are 
followed  according  to  the  seasons  of  the  year,  it 
follows  that  the  Orishas  of  the  different  professions 
should  also  appear  to  rule  certain  seasons. 

In  the  earliest  period  of  man’s  existence,  the  period 
from  marriage  to  birth  and  the  problems  involved 
seem  to  have  occcupied  his  attention,  and  as  he  was 
driven  to  shelter  by  the  first  rains,  and  that  was  the 
time  of  marriage,  the  rain  season  was  of  the  greatest 
importance  to  him,  hence  his  primitive  calendar  of 
eight  rain  months.  As  he  progressed  in  civilisation 
so  did  his  sense  of  time,  until  Ifa,  or  some  great 
philosopher,  fixed  his  primitive  observations,  and  gave 
him  his  present  lunar  calendar.  It  seems  to  me  that 


192  NIGERIAN  STUDIES  chap. 

there  can  no  longer,  now,  be  any  doubt  about  either 
the  order  or  form  of  the  ancient  West  African  social 
and  religious  system. 

In  Chapter  XII.  I have  connected  the  leopard  with 
the  Alafin,  and  given  the  insignia  by  which  one  may 
recognise  the  head  of  the  Yoruba  people.  The  sign 
of  office  of  the  Alake,  the  head  chief  of  the  Egba, 
is  a crown  of  beads. 

In  the  olden  days  in  the  Congo,  that  is  before 
European  control  existed,  we  had  to  be  very 
careful  in  regard  to  etiquette  in  our  relations  with 
the  chiefs.  As  wearers  of  boots  we  white  men  ranked 
with  the  highest  in  the  land,  and  could  command  the 
respect  due  to  our  station,  if  not  our  deserts.  I 
remember  on  one  occasion,  shortly  after  my  arrival 
on  the  coast,  being  called  and  treated  by  a rich  native 
trader  as  a “small  boy”  (a  person  of  no  importance). 
Well,  we  had  no  armies  or  force  of  our  own  by  which 
to  maintain  our  authority,  so  we  had  to  rely  upon  the 
goodwill  of  our  native  chief.  On  this  occasion  the 
chief  was  called  down,  and  three  chairs  were  placed 
in  the  yard  in  front  of  the  house.  The  chief  who, 
for  the  occasion,  wore  boots,  sat  in  the  centre  chair, 
and  I sat  in  the  chair  on  his  right.  The  wicked 
native  who  had  dared  to  call  me  a “small  boy”  was 
invited  to  put  on  a pair  of  boots  and  sit  in  the  vacant 
chair.  He  ran  away,  and  so  lost  the  “ palaver,”  and 
was  fined.  And  when  we  called  the  chiefs  in  to  settle 
some  question  or  other,  we  had  to  place  so  many 
chairs  with  pieces  of  cloth  upon  them  for  the  greater 
chiefs  to  sit  on,  and  to  spread  mats  on  the  ground  for 


XVI 


SHANGO— OYA— OBA— OSHUN 


*93 


the  lesser  chiefs,  while,  rich  or  poor,  the  rest  of  the 
courtiers  or  followers  sat  on  the  earth. 

I find  much  the  same  custom  exists  in  Abeokuta. 

(1)  The  Alake,  of  course,  and  his  three  courtiers 
have  the  right  to  Agas,  or  chairs. 

(2)  The  Iyalode  has  the  right  to  an  Aga,  but  her 
three  courtiers  sit  on  mats. 

(3)  The  Balogun,  whose  sign  of  office  is  his  armour, 
has  the  right  to  a chair.  Two  of  his  courtiers, 
Bada  and  Seriki,  have  the  right  to  Agas,  but 
Ashipa  sits  on  a mat. 

(4)  The  Bashorun,  whose  sign  of  office  is  a large 
umbrella  and  a staff  of  beads,  has  the  right  to  a 
chair,  but  his  officers  sit  on  mats. 

(5)  The  Ogboni  are  distinguished  by  their  leather 
bags,  a long  walking-stick  or  staff,  and  the 
horse’s  tail  which  they  carry  on  their  shoulders. 

Each  chief  in  his  own  quarter  used  to  settle  disputes 
and  woman  palavers. 

When  there  was  a misunderstanding  among  the 
members  of  the  Ogboni,  all  the  members  of  the  craft 
assembled  and  settled  it. 

The  Ogboni  tried  all  murder  cases,  and,  as  has 
been  shown,  had  to  do  with  funerals.  The  head 
of  each  occupation  and  his  council,  such  as  hunters, 
farmers,  priests,  market  women  and  crafts,  settled 
the  palavers  touching  such  occupations.  But  when 
death  from  sickness  or  famine  raged  in  the  town, 
the  King,  nobles,  chiefs,  and  all  the  people  held 
a general  meeting.  Divination  took  place,  and 

o 


194 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CH.  XVI 


evildoers  were  sought  out  and  punished,  or  killed 
as  a sacrifice  to  their  outraged  Orishas. 

Such  was  what  may  be  called  the  Home 
Government  of  the  Yoruba,  but  as  conquerors 
these  people  have  progressed  a little  beyond  this, 
for  as  victors  the  head  chief  appointed  Ajele,  or 
Governors,  in  the  conquered  provinces.  These 
regents,  while  acting  as  tax-gatherers,  interfere  as 
little  as  possible  with  the  home  affairs  of  their 
districts.  A glance  at  the  following  chapter  on  the 
land  laws  in  the  Western  Province  of  S.  Nigeria, 
or  Yorubaland,  will  show  the  place  more  or  less  which 
these  Ajele  occupy. 


CHAPTER  XVII 


LAND  LAWS  1 

In  a paper  which  appeared  in  the  African  Journal , 
page  312,  No.  Ill,  April,  1902,  “a  native  of  Yoruba 
gave  an  interesting  account  of  the  ‘ Native  System 
of  Government  and  Land  Tenure  in  the  Yoruba 
Country.’  ” In  this  paper  he  states : 

“ All  lands  in  the  country  are  in  the  keeping 
of  chiefs  for  the  members  of  the  tribe  to  whom 
the  land  belongs.  There  is  not  a foot  of  land 
that  is  not  claimed  or  possessed  by  some  tribe 
or  other,  and  the  members  of  each  tribe  can  apply 
to  their  respective  chiefs  for  a grant  of  land  to 
be  used  and  cultivated  for  farming  or  other 
purposes.  Any  land  so  granted  becomes  the 
property  of  the  grantee  for  life  and  for  his  heirs 
after  him  in  perpetuity  with  all  that  grows  on 
it  and  all  that  lies  zmder  it.  (?) 2 But  such  land 
must  be  made  use  of ; i.e.  it  must  be  cultivated 
or  used  beneficially,  if  not,  the  grantee  is  liable 
to  lose  it,  and  it  may  then  be  given  to  another 
who  will  make  use  of  it. 

1 By  kind  permission  of  the  African  Society. 

2 (?)  Mine  R.E.D. 


*95 


O 2 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


196 

“No  land  is  granted  for  pecuniary  consideration  ; 
that  is,  no  land  is  given  for  so  much  money. 

A man  to  whom  land  is  granted  may  make  a 

present  to  the  grantor  if  he  so  chooses ; that  is 

merely  a private  gift. 

“ In  this  way  every  piece  of  land  is  owned 
by  someone  or  other,  and  the  boundaries  are 
generally  definite  and  clear. 

“In  the  native  system  of  Land  Tenure  not 

even  a King  has  a right  to  alienate  any  land  from 
him  to  whom  it  has  been  granted,  unless  indeed 
the  man  is  guilty  of  negligence  or  lawlessness, 
as  above  stated  : and  even  then  it  is  the  chief 
who  has  granted  the  land  who  dispossesses  the 
grantee. 

“It  is  important  to  note  that  the  idea  of  selling 
land  is  entirely  foreign  to  the  native  system.” 

In  Land  Tenure  in  West  Africa , Reports 
by  T.  C.  Rayner,  Esq.,  Chief  Justice  of  Lagos, 
and  J.  J.  C.  Healy,  Esq.,  Land  Commissioner, 
Chief  Justice  Rayner  writes — “ The  question  as 
to  how  the  land,  which  in  my  opinion  all  originally 
belonged  to  the  King  or  head  chief  of  the  country, 
became  divided  up  among  the  various  persons 
now  owning  it  is  not  always  easy  to  discover  : 
and  the  difficulty  is  increased  when  we  remember 
that  according  to  strict  native  ideas  land  is 
absolutely  inalienable.  I believe  that  the  notion 
that  land  can  be  sold,  or  given  in  such  a way 
that  the  original  owner  loses  all  interests  in 
it,  is  utterly  foreign  to  the  natives  of  all  this  coast. 

“There  is  no  time  limit  during  which  the 
grantee  may  occupy  : he  can  occupy  in  perpetuity, 
but  should  he  quit  the  land  it  reverts  to  the  owner, 


XVII 


LAND  LAWS 


!97 


and  in  certain  cases  the  owner  can  eject  him, 
e.g.  if  he  claims  the  land  as  his  and  denies  the 
grantor’s  right,  or  if  he  attempts  to  sell  the  land. 
The  grantor  regards  the  land  still  as  his,  subject 
to  the  grantee’s  right  to  occupy,  and  so  long 
as  he  pays  his  rent 1 (or  tribute,  as  it  is  more 
usually  called)  the  grantee  can  go  on  occupying, 
and  his  heirs  after  him  without  interference.  The 
rent  or  tribute  is  required  and  paid  in  the  case 
of  a stranger,  simply  as  an  acknowledgment  of 
the  grantee’s  title ; it  bears  no  relation  to  the 
value  of  the  land,  and  is  in  all  cases  quite 
nominal.  I think  there  can  be  no  doubt  that 

originally,  according  to  native  law,  land  was 
inalienable,2  and  that  the  chief  or  head  of  the 
community  was  the  only  person  who  could  be  said 
to  be  the  owner  of  the  land.” 

The  statements  of  an  individual  must  always  be 
looked  upon  as  more  or  less  an  expression  of  the 
impression  he  has  obtained  from  the  more  or  less 
restricted  field  of  his  labours. 


1 See  further  on,  where  natives  who  have  bought  land  declare  that  they 
have  not  to  pay  tribute. 

2 Note. — (MSS.  Mr.  E.  P.  Cotton,  L.S.,  B.E.,  F.R.A.S.,  Director  of 
Surveys,  S.  Nigeria.) 

The  inalienability  of  land  is  firmly  rooted  in  the  Yoruba  mind.  If  he 
is  convinced  that  his  ancestors  at  one  time  owned  a certain  piece  of  land* 
the  remoteness  of  that  ownership,  or  the  validity  of  the  present  owner’s 
title,  appears  to  be  no  bar  to  his  title. 

The  chiefs  of  country  towns  and  villages  do  not  understand  the  principles 
of  modern  land  alienation.  These  chiefs  are  quite  prepared  to  allot  land 
to  members  of  the  community,  or  even  to  strangers,  so  tongas  they  receive 
in  return  some  small  periodical  payment,  generally  in  kind , as  an  acknow- 
ledgment of  title.  The  grantee  may  occupy  the  land  for  any  length  of 
time,  but  should  he  attempt  to  sublet,  or  dispose  of  it  in  any  other  way 
the  grantor  may  at  once  eject  him. 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


198 

It  is  under  the  latter  category  that  I would  submit 
the  following  notes. 

It  would  appear  that  before  native  Governments 
were  organised  and  village  life  was  more  in  evidence, 
every  individual  enjoyed  the  right  of  taking  un- 
occupied land  as  much  as  he  could  use,  wherever  and 
whenever  he  pleased.  This  was  afterwards  deemed 
his  property  as  long  as  he  cared  to  keep  it  in  use,  and 
after  that  it  again  became  common  property,  and, 
according  to  D.  R.  Campbell  in  A Pilgrimage  to  my 
Motherland , this  custom  was  observed  by  all  the  Aku 
(Yoruba),1  and  I know  that  in  some  districts  in  the 
Central  Province  hunters  settled  on  so-called  waste 
land  and  had  families,  and  the  members  of  these 
families  planted  where  they  liked,  as  Mr.  Campbell 
says  all  the  Aku  did  in  1861. 

The  land  question  may  be  said  to  commence  when 
the  rights  of  fishing  in  reaches  of  rivers  were  first 
looked  upon  as  belonging  to  certain  fishermen,  and 
when  hunters  commenced  to  assert  their  rights  to 
certain  lands  as  theirs  for  hunting  purposes. 

First  Development. — But  as  the  villages  grew,  and 
farming  operations  extended,  farms  of  one  fisherman’s 
or  hunter’s  family  met  the  farms  of  another  fisherman’s 
or  hunter’s.  Then  disputes  and  little  wars  took  place 
until  some  agreement  between  the  two  families  fixed 
their  respective  boundaries.  In  this  way  came  about 
the  regulation  of  farming  operations  by  the  head  of 

1 Aku  is  probably  a corruption  of  the  word  Eko,  the  name  of  the 
people  of  Lagos.  Eko  would  probably  be  the  name  given  in  Sierra 
Leone  to  people  coming  from  Lagos,  and  so  to  Yoruba  generally.  Hence 
perhaps  the  Kroo  boys’  word  for  the  Yoruba  Nagu. 


XVII 


LAND  LAWS 


!99 


the  family  or  Bale.  We  have  instances  of  this  in 
small  villages  in  the  Benin  city  territories. 

Second  Development. — Disputes  occurred  about  stand- 
ing plants  such  as  bananas,  and  at  last  it  became  a 
custom  for  a farmer  to  claim  the  land  as  long  as  any- 
thing on  it  that  he  had  planted  bore  fruit. 

Third  Development. — In  time,  powerful  families 
conquered  their  weaker  neighbours,  and  at  last  we 
have  the  land  spoken  of  as  belonging  to  some  great 
chief.  These  chiefs  extended  their  kingdoms,  until 
we  have  powerful  native  states  such  as  that  of  Benin 
governing  many  families  of  different  origin.  This 
kingdom  was  governed  by  the  Oba  and  Council 
through  Ogies 1 in  the  Benin  kingdom.  And  these 
Ogies,  residing  generally  at  the  capital  of  the 
conquered  families  as  representatives  of  the  conquer- 
ing Oba,  had  the  power  to  distribute  land  among  the 
many  families  under  them,  all  land  now  being  looked 
upon,  at  least  theoretically,  as  belonging  to  the  Oba. 
And  thus  what  may  at  one  time  have  been  looked 
upon  as  waste  land  in  a province  or  kingdom  became 
the  property  of  the  Oba.  In  the  case  of  the  king- 
dom of  Benin,  these  waste  lands  were  from  time 
to  time  distributed  amongst  the  King’s  sons,  who 
thus  became  Ogies,  paying  yearly  tribute  to  the 
Oba. 

In  Yorubaland  theoretically  all  the  land  belongs  to 
the  Alafin  of  Oyo,  and  the  chiefs  of  the  so-called 
independent  peoples  certainly  at  one  time  paid  tribute 
to  him. 

1 Kongo  zovo  in  the  Congo,  Ajele  in  Yorubaland. 


200 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


Fourth  Development. — After  many  years  of  pro- 
vincial warfare  and  European  intervention,  we  find 
Yorubaland  divided  into  two  great  divisions,  (i)  The 
Protectorate  and  (2)  the  Colony  of  S.  Nigeria  (lately 
Lagos). 

The  Protectorate  in  the  Western  Province  may  be 
said  to  be  formed  of  the  Oyo,  Elesha,  Ife,  Ibadan, 
Egba,  Ijebu,  and  Ondo  protected  native  states. 

The  Supreme  Court  has  power  and  jurisdiction  in 
each  of  these  states  for  the  administration  and  control 
of  the  property  and  persons  of  all  persons  not  being 
natives  of  each  individual  state , that  is,  of  aliens  in  the 
restricted  sense  of  the  word,  but  it  has  no  control 
apparently  over  the  property  of  the  natives  in  each 
state,  so  that  here,  at  any  rate,  land  disputes  are  heard 
and  judged  by  the  natives  themselves  according  to 
native  law,  or  its  abuse,  as  the  case  may  be. 

Fifth  Development. — 1.  In  that  part  of  Yorubaland 
where  the  Alafin  holds  direct  sway,  old  customs  are 
conserved  far  more  strictly  that  in  the  other  states 
where  the  people  have  more  power,  and  the  sale 
of  land,  although  not  unknown,  is  rare.  It  occurs 
at  times  when  the  claim  to  succeed  to  the  ownership 
of  land  is  disputed.  As  a way  out  of  the  difficulty, 
the  farm  is  sold  and  the  yield  divided  between  the 
claimants.  But  the  Alafin  has  the  right  to  step  in 
and  take  away  the  land  from  the  family  and  give  it 
to  whom  he  likes.  This  is  seldom  done,  but  it  is 
possible. 

The  custom  of  buying  and  selling  land  is  gradually 
becoming  more  common,  but  it  is  much  rarer  here 


XVII 


LAND  LAWS 


201 


than  in  other  states  where  more  kola  and  palm  trees 
are  planted. 

2.  In  Ibadan  the  custom  of  selling  land,  it  appears, 
has  crept  in  through  the  depravity  of  certain  owners 
of  farms  and  the  necessity  of  their  paying  back 
money  that  has  been  borrowed. 

(a)  Moredaiyo  of  Ibadan,  in  answer  to  my  questions, 
gave  me  the  following  information  : — 

The  Alafin  is  looked  upon  as  owner  of  all  the  land. 
The  Bale  of  Ibadan  received  some  land  from  the 
Alafin,  but  he  has  added  to  it  greatly  by  conquest. 
The  Bale  took  the  land  from  the  conquered  people, 
and  it  now  belongs  to  him.  After  making  many 
of  the  conquered  people  slaves,  some  of  those  who 
had  escaped  returned  to  their  towns  under  an  Ajele 
appointed  by  the  Bale,  such  as  the  towns  of  Ijaiye, 
Awaiyi,  Iwahun,  Okeamu,  Ilesan,  Takiti,  Gbagba, 
Gangan,  Tide,  Ijebure,  Otun  Iyapa,  Iro,  Isi,  Ileje, 
Omujelu,  Oyife,  Okeako,  Tapati,  Egbe,  Nikinyinrin, 
Okeapa,  Olofashan,  Oye,  Aiyidi,  Imesin,  Ikogusi, 
Ifewara,  Itaogbolu,  Ilofa;  but  other  towns  that  had 
chiefs  with  titles  recognised  by  the  Alafin,  such  as  Ife, 
Elesha,  were  left  alone. 

If  anyone  in  the  towns  with  an  Ajele1  wanted  land, 
he  would  go  to  the  Ajele  with  a present  (20  heads 
of  cowries  = 10/-)  and  ask  for  what  he  wanted.  If  the 
Ajele  agreed,  he  would  take  him  to  the  land  and 
mark  the  boundaries  in  proportion  to  the  number  of 
retainers  the  petitioner  brought  with  him. 

1 This  implies  that  the  conquered  land  belongs  to  the  conqueror  and 
does  not  remain  in  the  hands  of  the  conquered  chief. 


202 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


When  the  Ajele  gives  the  land  he  makes  the 
petitioner  promise  not  to  fight  or  disobey  the  law,  or 
the  land  will  be  taken  from  him. 

The  petitioner  now  becomes  an  Onile  (or  one  who 
has  land). 

The  boundaries  are  cut,  and  heaps  of  earth  are 
made  at  intervals,  and  on  these  a peregun  tree  is 
planted. 

Every  year,  as  a thank-offering,  the  Onile  gives 
the  Ajele  a present  of  that  product  which  thrives 
best  on  the  land. 

The  Onile  now  divides  his  land  among  his  family 
and  retainers  and  they  become  farmers,  or  Oloko 
(owners  of  farms).  The  Onile  has  the  right  to  call 
on  the  Oloko  to  work  for  him  for  one  or  two  days 
in  the  year,  to  fire  the  bush  and  prepare  a place  for 
him  to  farm,  and  the  Oloko  give  the  Onile  a yearly 
present.  The  Onile  may  not  sell  the  land  to  his  re- 
tainers, he  gives  it  to  them  and  they  legally  have  no 
right  to  sell  it.  It  happens,  however,  that  on  the  death 
of  a father  the  son  who  has  succeeded  to  the  farm 
becomes  a worthless  spendthrift,  and  has  had  to  borrow 
money  from  some  rich  man.  This  money-lender 
presses  him  for  repayment,  and  the  wicked  son  has 
told  him  to  take  the  farm  and  cease  bothering  him. 
The  Onile  may  if  he  likes  interfere  and  drive  such 
a wicked  person  out  of  his  farm,  and,  if  he  has  no  son, 
or  near  relation,  take  the  farm  away  and  give  it 
to  someone  else  who,  however,  must  pay  the  money- 
lender the  sum  borrowed.  The  money-lender  cannot 
take  possession  without  the  consent  of  the  Onile. 


xvir 


LAND  LAWS 


203 


(b)  Moredaiyo’s  father  was  an  Onile,  and  gave 
a farm  to  one  of  his  friends  called  Lesinpo.  Lesinpo 
died.  His  son  occupied  the  farm.  He  was  a wicked 
person,  and  borrowed  money  and  could  not  pay. 
For  some  years  the  money-lender  lost  sight  of  the 
farmer,  and  so  he  attempted  to  jump  the  farm.  He 
did  this  by  placing  palm  leaves  on  it.  The  Onile  saw 
the  palm  leaves,  and  threw  them  away.  The  money- 
lender asked  who  had  dared  to  displace  the  leaves. 
The  Onile  said  he  had,  as  the  land  was  his.  The 
money-lender  then  said  “the  farmer  owes  me  money 
and  he  has  gone  away.”  He  was  told  he  had  no  right 
to  take  the  farm  for  the  money  owed,  as  the  farmer 
had  relatives.  The  relatives  paid  the  money-lender, 
and  he  recognised  this  and  gave  up  his  claim  to  the 
farm. 

(c)  Many  Onile,  if  they  have  more  land  than 
they  require,  sell  it  to  third  parties,  and  the  price 
varies  from  two  bags,  or  icw.,  to  twenty  bags  of 
cowries,  or  ^5.  This  buyer  pays  no  yearly  tribute, 
to  the  Onile  or  the  Ajele,  and  the  transaction  is 
really  contrary  to  the  old  customary  law. 

When  one  Bale  succeeds  another,  he  changes 
the  Ajele  and  many  of  the  customs  of  his 
predecessor. 

So  in  the  Ibadan  territory,  in  spite  of  the  fact 
that  according  to  ancient  lawr,  land  is  inalienable,  it 
has  been  pawned  and  sold  for  a long  time,  and  is 
still  being  sold. 

3.  The  selling  of  land  with  the  consent  of  the 
chief  in  Ijebuland  has  reached  such  a pitch  that 


204 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


when  I was  last  there,  the  chiefs  were  trying  to 
prevent  people  from  selling  or  buying  land  in  a 
certain  quarter  of  the  town  of  Ijebu,  which  they 
held  more  or  less  sacred. 

4.  Mr.  Pellegrin,  an  intelligent  and  educated 
Egba,  gave  me  the  following  notes  : — 

“ All  Yorubaland  belonged  to  the  Alafin,  but  the 
Egba  after  the  civil  wars  settled  at  Abeokuta,  and 
by  right  of  conquest  took  and  kept  possession  of 
most  of  the  land  now  known  as  Egbaland.  In  the 
conquered  towns  they  generally  placed  an  Ajele,1 
but  left  the  chief  in  many  cases  in  possession, 
exacting,  however,  a yearly  tribute.  Thus  Otta, 
Agege,  Isheri  Igawn,  and  Iro  belonged  to  the  people 
known  as  Awuri,  but  now  form  part  of  Egbaland. 

“ Supposing  natives  in  any  of  these  districts  wanted 
land,  they  would  go  to  the  Bale  and  ask  him  for 
it,  and  he,  on  receipt  of  twelve  kola  and  one  case 
of  gin,  would  grant  it  on  condition  that  they  would 
abide  by  the  laws  of  the  country. 

“ One  of  the  customs  of  the  country  was  to  give 
the  Bale  a small  portion  of  the  products  of  the 
land,  and  another  was  that  he  could  not  sell  the 
land.  When  one  of  these  farmers  dies  and  his 
son  does  not  care  to  occupy  the  land,  the  Bale  can 
give  the  farm  to  another,  otherwise,  the  farm 

1 Note. — Ajelehavebeen  known  to  grant  land  to  Onile  who  have  planted 
it  up  with  cocoa  and  kola,  and  when  the  trees  are  bearing,  endeavour  to  turn 
the  Onile  out,  without  fair  compensation.  A case  of  this  kind  not  long 
ago  came  before  the  notice  of  the  Resident  of  Ibadan,  who  insisted  on  a 
fair  price  being  paid  to  the  Onile  by  the  Ajele.  In  this  case  the  ancient 
land  law,  in  view  of  modern  agricultural  development,  became  evidently 
unfair. 


XVII 


LAND  LAWS 


205 


descends  to  the  son.  The  occupier  of  this  land 
can,  in  his  turn,  give  a portion  of  the  granted  land 
to  a friend  or  anyone  other  than  an  alien.  He  re- 
ceives a present  and  something  yearly  from  this 
person.  But  if  this  part  that  is  given  to  a third 
party  happens  to  be  thick  forest  land,  and  the 
receiver  has  to  clear  it,  the  land  becomes  his,  and 
as  an  Onile  he  can  leave  it  to  his  son.  This  man 
may  not  sell  the  land,  but  he  can  give  it  to  another 
person  and  receive  the  case  of  gin  and  twelve 
kola. 

“A  woman  may  own  land.  (See  below  daughter.) 

“A  slave  may  not  own  land,  but  he  may  have 
a farm  on  his  master’s  land.  In  the  event  of  the 
death  of  his  master,  the  slave  may  become  the 
property  of  any  of  the  deceased’s  relations  and  be 
taken  away,  or  he  may  be  allowed  to  remain  on 
the  land  and  go  with  it  to  his  master’s  successor. 
A slave  who  has  farmed  and  redeemed  himself 
becomes  the  owner  of  his  farm. 

“When  the  land  is  allotted,  Akoko,  Atori  or 
Peregun  trees  are  planted  on  heaps  of  earth,  and 
serve  as  boundaries. 

“ The  land  does  not  belong  to  the  family,  but  to 
the  father,  and,  later  on  the  son  or  daughter. 

“ By  family  is  understood  uncles,  aunts,  nephews, 
nieces  on  both  the  Obakan  (father’s)  side,  and  the 
Iyekan  (mother’s)  side.  On  the  death  of  the 
father,  the  chief  divides  money,  goods,  slaves 
or  other  movable  property  among  the  family.  This 
division  is  made  in  accordance  with  the  amount 


206 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


spent  by  the  individuals  of  the  family  during  the 
death  and  funeral  ceremonies,  and  also  in  accordance 
with  the  services  rendered  to  the  deceased  during 
his  lifetime. 

“ In  the  event  of  the  owner  leaving  the  farm  without 
a representative  for  a long  time  he  may  at  any  time 
come  back  and  claim  it.  But  should  he  die  while 
absent,  and  not  have  left  any  planted  trees,  and  the 
chiefs  have  given  the  land  to  another,  the  son  or  his 
heir  cannot  lay  claim  to  the  land,  which  has  merely 
been  farmed  (see  Baba  Numi’s  report  later  on).  But 
in  the  event  of  there  being  any  living  trees  planted  by 
him  on  the  farm,  the  son  or  heir  may  claim  it.  But 
these  questions  are  decided  on  their  merits.” 

Baba  Numi,  an  old  Egba,  illiterate,  but  said  to 
know  all  about  Egba  land  laws,  gave  me  the  following 
account : — 

“ When  a man  asks  for  land,  the  first  question  to  be 
considered  is — ‘ Is  he  a native  or  an  alien?’ 

“ If  he  is  not  an  Egba,  and  goes  to  a man  and  asks 
for  land,  that  man  must  take  him  to  the  chief  of  the 
district,  Bale,  Balogun  or  Osi.  If  they  agree  to  give 
the  stranger  land,  the  Balogun  is  asked  to  take  him 
and  show  him  the  land  allotted  to  him.  When  he 
dies  and  has  children,  they  can  succeed  to  it.  If  the 
successor  owes  money,  he  can  pawn  the  land  with  the 
Bale’s  consent,  and  the  moneylender  can  take  the  farm 
if  none  of  his  relations  redeem  it,  but  neither  he  nor 
the  moneylender  can  sell  the  farm. 

“ Supposing  he  is  not  a stranger,  he  must  be  the  son 
of  a father  who  has  land.  If  the  land  is  too  small  for 


XVII 


LAND  LAWS 


207 


the  son  in  possession  to  divide,  the  Bale  will  grant  him 
a portion  of  land  which  becomes  his  property.  It  is 
granted  to  him  and  his  successors  in  perpetuity  for  his 
and  their  use,  but  he  is  not  allowed  to  sell  it.  If  he  is 
in  debt,  the  family  censure  him  and  pay  his  debts,  but 
if  his  debt  is  too  large  for  them  to  pay,  they  give  their 
consent  to  his  pawning  the  farm,  and  the  moneylender, 
with  the  consent  of  the  Bale,  can  take  the  farm. 

“ Pawning  land  is  a very  old  custom  in  this  country. 

“ The  moneylender  does  not  plant  trees,  or  then 
plants  them  at  his  risk,  as  the  family  may  redeem  their 
farm  at  any  time,  and  all  the  trees  planted  become  the 
property  of  the  original  owning  family. 

“ The  selling  of  land  has  been  done  privately  for  a 
very  long  time  ; people  do  this  without  the  chief s 
knowledge,  and  people  look  upon  the  new  occupier  as 
one  who  has  been  allowed  to  farm  and  live  on  the 
seller’s  land  by  his  consent. 

“ Should  it  become  known  that  an  owner  has  sold  his 
land,  the  seller  gets  into  trouble,  and  is  driven  out  of 
the  country,  but  the  buyer  is  not  punished , and  is 
allowed  to  go  on  farming  in  peace.  If  a man  simply 
farms  his  land  and  plants  no  trees,  and  is  not  married, 
and  goes  away,  and  dies,  his  farm  is  given  away  to 
another,  and  should  he  have  a son  while  abroad,  and 
that  son  comes  and  claims  the  farm,  he  has  no  right 
to  do  so,  and  the  farm  continues  in  the  possession  of 
the  occupier. 

“ If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  farmer  had  a son  when 
he  went  away,  and  took  him  with  him,  and  he  died 
abroad,  and  his  son  came  back  and  found  his  father’s 


208 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CH.  XVII 


farm  occupied,  the  Bale  would  call  him  and  the 
occupier  before  him  and  ask  the  latter  to  give  the 
former  a portion  of  the  land.  The  son,  however, 
would  have  to  allow  the  occupier  to  reap  the  fruit  of 
any  trees  he  had  planted  there,  so  it  generally  ended 
in  the  Bale  giving  the  son  another  piece  of  land.” 

Such  is  some  of  the  evidence  which  I have  collated, 
and  from  this  we  see  that,  legally  speaking,  according 
to  native  customary  law,  land  is  inalienable,  and  that 
the  sale  of  land  is  a crime  against  the  state.  But,  on 
the  other  hand,  land  is  sold  and  the  buyer  is  left  in 
possession. 


CHAPTER  XVIII 


CONCLUSION 

By  the  fear  of  death  and  the  desire  to  propagate  and 
live,  the  Yoruba’s  thoughts  were  driven  to  the  study 
in  nature  of  the  phenomena  that  caused  death,  or 
helped  him  to  live  and  propagate.  And  as  they 
progressed,  men  in  all  lines  of  life,  i.e.  the  fisherman, 
the  hunter,  the  priest,  the  farmer,  and,  later  on,  the 
market  women  and  the  craftsmen,  all  aided  in  this 
search  for  the  causes  of  life  and  death,  and  the  true 
nature  of  the  spirit  presiding  over  them  all.  In  this 
way  it  does  not  seem  strange  to  me  that,  if  man  has 
developed  from  a non-speaking  animal  stage  of  exist- 
ence to  his  present  speaking  and  cultivated  stage,  his 
knowledge  of  things  and  his  way  of  expressing  his 
ideas  should  have  also  developed  step  by  step.  I am 
not  wonder-struck  that  man,  governed  more  or  less  by 
his  senses  and  environment,  should  have  instinctively 
built  up  trains  of  thought  and  ways  of  expressing 
them  that  have  led  native  philosophers  to  divide  their 
mythology  into  certain  well-defined  categories.  But  I 
admit  that  a philologist  unaided  by  a long  and  great 
knowledge  of  the  people  whose  language  he  may  be 

2°9  p 


210 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


studying,  will  find  great  difficulty  in  recognising  these 
categories  in  any  but  a primitive  language.  I think 
that  his  studies  may  best  be  rewarded  in  Africa 
by  a thorough  investigation  of  some  Bantu  tongue, 
but  even  here  the  student  will  need  a more  or  less 
“ primitive  mind  ” attitude  to  carry  out  his  work. 

Yemaja’s,  or  Yemoja’s,  first  offspring  by  her  son 
Orungun  was  the  sea  Orisha,  Olokun.  In  this  word 
we  have  the  idea  of  “ murmuring.”  The  first  man, 
says  another  legend,  was  Obalofun,  the  first  speaker. 
Among  the  Bavili,  Zimini,  a plural  word,  literally 
meaning  the  male  and  female  Egos,  comes  to  mean 
the  swallower,  and  Zimini  was  the  man  of  the  sea. 
It  seems,  therefore,  that  we  shall  not  be  doing  the 
West  African  a wrong  by  concluding  that  he  looked 
upon  his  first  parent  as  a creature  from  the  sea. 

(i)  As  a “merman,”  shall  we  say,  he  was  ruled 
rather  by  instinct  than  by  reason,  and  I may  presume 
that  he  knew  more  about  propagation 1 than  about 


1 The  doyen  of  the  senses  is  that  of  smell  in  order  of  creation.  Bishop 
Crowther  gives  the  word  Imu  (Crowther)  or  Imaw  for  our  word  nose. 
This  word  also  means  “sense”  in  a general  way,  thus  the  sense  of  taste 
is  written  imu  tawwo  (towo).  Without  any  accent  over  the  last  syllable 
imu  means  the  act  of  drinking.  With  a grave  accent  imu  means  know- 
ledge, science,  mythology,  philosophy.  In  connection  with  the  word  Hu 
(to  germinate)  it  means  Imuhu,  to  create.  Combined  with  the  words  Bi 
(to  beget)  and  Si  (to  be)  in  the  word  imubisi,  it  means  propagation. 

The  offspring  Awmaw  (omo)  that  shines  or  is  good  (dan)  means  a 
virgin,  omidan,  another  name  for  whom  is  wundia  (probably  a Hausa 
word),  the  one  who  gives  pleasure.  Thus  virginity  and  purity  gave 
pleasure  to  the  ancient  Yoruba.  On  the  other  hand,  that  which  was  lewd 
and  bad  he  called  Buburu,  i.e.  that  which  swelled  and  sent  out  an 
offensive  smell.  I need  hardly  remind  my  readers  of  the  action  of  animals 
in  this  regard,  and  that  we  still  talk  of  the  fires  of  love  and  desire.  The 
native  has  another  word  for  to  smell,  “ Gborun  ” (Crowther),  which  is 
connected  with  the  idea  of  heat  (Orun)  and  to  rub  (gbo). 


XVIII 


CONCLUSION 


21 1 


association,  and  that  for  a long  time  this  instinct 
occupied  most  of  primitive  man’s  attention.  He  lived 
on  herbs  and  leaves. 

At  length  we  arrive  at  the  stage  when  man  busied 
himself  with  certain  occupations. 

(2)  As  a fisherman,  or  still  very  primitive  man,  the 
elements  that  he  constantly  braved  and  the  natural 
phenomena  that  he  noticed  caused  him  to  ponder  and 
weigh  things.  The  oft-recurring  light  and  darkness, 
day  and  night,  heaven  and  earth,  sun  and  moon,  heat 
and  cold,  the  power  of  the  murmuring  waves  of  the 
sea,  the  fierce  rushing  of  flooded  rivers,  their  constant 
beating  against  the  rocks,  thunder,  lightning,  wild 
winds  and  torrential  rains,  marriage  and  birth,  life 
and  death  ; all  these  kept  his  receptivity  at  work. 


We  will  now  consider  the  sense  of  touch.  The  verb  Kan  is  to  touch, 
and  Shaw  is  an  adverb  qualifying  verbs  of  touching  or  dipping,  and 
means  “just  a touch.”  The  word  Shawkan  (Crowther)  is  to  copulate. 
In  this  connection  it  is  bad  for  us  when  our  body  aches,  and  an  ache  is 
“kan.”  On  the  other  hand,  when  we  are  free  from  ache  “ Dida  ara”  it  is 
good  Dida  ara  = healthiness. 

To  behold  is  wo,  and  iwo  not  only  means  sight  but  also  light  and 
countenance.  Primitive  man,  attracted  by  her  beauty  or  countenance 
(iwo)  pursued  (de)  woman  and  seduced  (dewo)  her.  That  which  is  (ewa) 
is  beauty,  while  that  which  does  not  abide  (ailewa)  is  ugliness. 

The  word  to  eat  (je)  means  also  to  win.  The  idea  of  following  (taw) 
beauty  (iwo)  apparently  continues  in  the  idea  of  taste  (taw  wo).  That 
which  is  sweet,  delicious,  is  called  dun,  while  that  which  is  nasty  is 
compared  to  the  tasteless  husks  of  Indian  corn  (eri). 

I have  now  given  you  the  Yoruba  idea  of  good  and  bad  under  the 
senses  of  smell,  touch,  sight,  and  taste,  it  is  left  to  trace  their  idea  of 
good  and  bad  in  a general  sense.  Well,  the  Yoruba,  like  the  Bavili, 
looks  upon  that  which  produces  as  good,  i.e.  Da  to  create,  Ara  body,  or 
Dara  good.  Its  opposite  Aidara  means  bad. 

It  is  evident  therefore  that  the  Yoruba  ideas  of  good  and  bad  are 
associated  with  the  moral  emotions  of  that  most  primitive  of  all 
religions,  which  may  be  summed  up  in  the  words  “ Increase  and 
multiply.” 


P 2 


212 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


H is  knowledge  of  all  these  “powers”  may  have  been, 
nay,  certainly  was,  as  primitive  as  he,  but  in  his 
earliest  stage  of  existence  he  commenced  to  associate 
these  powers  with  the  life  he  propagated  as  the  chief 
causes  of  death.  He  soon  learnt  that  he  was  all  too 
impotent  to  fight  these  terrific  powers,  and  so  kept  his 
ears  open  to  catch  the  slightest  sound  that  might 
betray  their  coming.  Although  these  powers  were 
the  cause  of  death,  the  waters  yielded  to  the  fisherman 
fish  as  the  food  upon  which  he  lived,  and  so  the  sea, 
the  lagoon  and  the  rivers,  and  the  powers  behind 
them,  and  the  fish  became  in  a way  sacred  to  him. 
More  lives  would  be  lost  in  his  search  for  food  in  the 
waters  than  anywhere  else.  Thus,  at  the  foundation 
of  religion,  which  commenced  in  the  very  earliest 
existence  of  propagating  man  and  his  fear  of  death, 
we  have  a sense  of  primitive  gratitude  to  the  waters 
that  supplied  him  in  this  stage  with  food.  And  in 
this  way  these  water  spirits,  Olokun  and  Olosa,  be- 
came associated  with  that  which  quickened  his  sense 
of  hearing.  Sound  (figured  here  by  the  mighty, 
murmuring  Olokun,  the  giver  of  fish,  salt,  sweetness, 
wisdom,  and  by  the  rushing  of  the  waters  of  the 
rivers,  as  they  flow  from  the  interior  into  the  sea)  is 
the  great  parent  of  this  family  or  category  of  thought. 
His  opposite  is  the  Lagoon,  the  listener,  the  absorber, 
through  whom  the  salt  is  made.  As  a “ merman  ” 
he  may  have  heard,  made  a noise,  smelt,  felt,  seen 
and  tasted,  but  he  probably  knew  little  or  nothing  of 
associating,  in  the  same  way  as  thinking  man  does, 
outside  phenomena  with  his  senses.  This,  I think,  is 


XVIII 


CONCLUSION 


213 


the  first  principle  that  native  philosophy  points  to,  i.e. 
that  animals  were  credited,  figuratively  speaking,  only 
with  the  senses  of  smell,  touch,  sight  and  taste,  and 
that  the  great  difference  between  him  and  man  is  the 
way  in  which  the  latter  developed  his  sense  of  hear- 
ing, and  his  powers  of  speech.  Hence  in  the  philo- 
sophy of  the  Bavili  the  ear  is  said  to  have  been,  in  his 
making,  the  first  thing  formed  in  the  womb. 

(3)  The  next  stage  in  the  development  of  moral 
man  is  figured  to  us  by  the  hunter,  and  the  trees  and 
herbs  growing  out  of  the  earth.  From  trapping  fish 
to  trapping  “ meat  ” is  quite  a natural  step.  The 
lessons  about  the  “powers”  which  the  primitive 
fisherman  learnt  have  been  handed  down,  but  whereas 
the  fisherman  looked  to  the  “ waters  ” for  his  food,  on 
land  the  hunter  has  turned  to  the  forests.  Long- 
before  the  hunter  had  bows  and  arrows,  he  probably 
killed  animals 1 by  piercing  them  with  pointed  sticks, 
or  by  beating  them  to  death,  or  by  throwing 
stones  at  them.  The  hunter  must  have  developed  a 
great  many  virtues,  courage  among  the  rest.  And 
hunting  and  its  risks  must  have  been  the  chief  cause 
of  death.  As  he  beat  down  animals,  so  he  was  beaten 
down  by  the  Orisha  called  “ Ogun  ” (the  one  who 
beats  or  pierces  with  a pointed  stick).  He  learnt  to 
mimic  the  cries  of  certain  birds  and  animals  to  lure 
them  to  their  death.  Someone  then  lured  him  on  to 
death.  This  was  Oshowsi,  or  Oshu,  the  one  who 
speaks,  o,  him,  si,  to  (used  always  with  a verb  of 


1 In  fact  this  manner  of  hunting  and  killing  with  pointed  sticks,  I am  told 
by  Mr.  E.  Torday,  is  still  common  in  the  interior  of  the  Congo. 


214 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


motion  towards),  the  wife  of  Ogun.  When  a man  or 
woman  was  killed  by  Ogun,  some  fault  or  want  of 
virtue  was  given  as  the  reason.  Ogun  in  this  way 
was  soon  looked  upon  as  a great  judge  and  execu- 
tioner. Hunters  became  great  fighters,  and,  after  the 
discovery  of  iron,  were  armed  with  arrows,  tipped  with 
this  metal  beaten  into  shape  by  some  follower  of 
Ogun,  known  later  on  as  the  blacksmith.  Wandering 
through  the  woods  as  the  hunter  did,  he  is  said  to 
have  been  captured  by  Aja  and  taught  the  use  of 
herbs,  and  so  became  a medicine  man.  In  a later 
“cycle”  of  development  he  tamed  the  young  of 
animals  he  captured,  which  later  bred  and  became 
domesticated.  Ogun  is  not  only  the  god  of  hunters, 
and  implements  of  war,  etc.,  but  the  word  is  also  the 
name  of  the  stone  which  acts  as  the  blacksmith’s  anvil. 
Ellis  tells  us  that  the  ground  is  sacred  to  him,  because 
iron  ore  is  found  in  it  ; he  certainly  is  a kind  of  earth 
god,  and  we  have  noted  that  he  takes  Odudua’s  place 
as  a day  of  the  week,  but  I think  it  is  rather  through 
his  connection  with  the  hunter,  whose  sphere  of  action 
was  on  earth,  as  opposed  to  the  fisherman’s  on  water, 
that  he  and  Odudua  are  known  as  earth  Orishas.  At 
any  rate,  under  the  category  of  earth  we  have  ideas  of 
virtue,  reason,  justice,  speech,  and  medicine.  The 
fisherman  associated  ideas  of  good  and  evil  with  his 
powerful  Orishas,  the  hunter  brought  his  brain  to 
work  in  the  problem,  and  reached  the  stage  of 
ideation. 

(4  and  5)  The  next  great  stages  are  so  nearly  con- 
nected with  procreation  and  farming  as  to  be  almost 


XVIII 


CONCLUSION 


215 


inseparable.  Though  they  occupy  the  same  seasons, 
we  must  remember  that  these  two  great  occupations  of 
the  thoughts  of  primitive  man  belong,  as  stages,  to 
two  different  cycles,  in  the  first  of  which  agriculture 
played  no  part,  but  as  cycle  follows  cycle,  and  the 
same  season  and  occupation  reappear,  man  is  forced 
to  entertain  thoughts  of  both  at  the  same  time. 

The  following  diagram  may  make  this  more 


plain 

First  Stage. 

Second  Cycle. 

3 1 

Fisherman 

Association 

Dry  season 

, 'V 

5} 

Hunter 

Ideation 

'll 

Mar- 

riage 

7} 

Planting 

Imagination 

n 

Concep 

tion 

8 } 
9 1 

Germination 

Impression 

Rain  season, 
ancient  calendar 

1 1 

Preg- 

nancy 

IO  } 
11  J 

Harvest 

Reproduction 

7 i 

Life 

12  1 

c 

and 

Putrefaction 

Construction 

8 J 

Death 

13  J 

9 or 

1 Birth 

Storing 

The 

farmer 

now 

began  to 

cultivate 

the  many 

herbs 

which,  year 

after 

year, 

he  had 

found  by 

experiment  were  good  for  food.  Driven  by  the 
storms  to  shelter  at  the  beginning  of  the  rains  he 
naturally  wished  to  have  his  vegetable  food  growing 
near  to  his  hut.  Perhaps  he  first  placed  his  shelter 
near  to  where  the  green  stuff  grew.  He  would  notice 
that  at  the  time  the  rains  came  these  nature-sown 
crops  began  to  grow.  And  it  was  at  this  time  that 


2x6 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


he  mated.  The  great  heat  just  before  the  rains 
caused  fire  1 to  come,  as  he  thought,  from  the  hills, 
and  this  phenomenon  he  called  Oke.  Then  came 
the  storms  and  lightning,  warning  him  that  it  was 
time  to  mate  and  seek  shelter.  In  this  capacity 
of  watcher  of  the  signs  of  the  times  of  propagation 
he  was  acting  as  a primitive  priest.  As  a farmer 
he,  as  head  of  the  house  (Bale),  provided  his 
ancestors  and  family  with  food.  They  needed  fish, 
birds,  reptiles,  animals  and  vegetables. 

In  these  4th  and  5th  developments  of  thought, 
or  categories,  we  have  on  the  one  hand  ideas  of 
heat,  fire,  smell  of  burning,  imagination,  love, 
marriage,  planting  and  sowing ; and  on  the  other, 
which  closely  follows  it,  the  first  fruits  of  the  contact 
of  the  waters  of  heaven  and  the  heated  earth,  the 
cold  brought  by  the  cooling  rains,  the  quenching 
of  the  fires,  impression,  satisfaction  of  desire, 
conception,  germination,  motion  and  the  first 
harvest  of  the  self-sown  and  now  planted  grain. 
In  other  words  all  the  ideas  contained  in  the 
Orishas,  Oke  and  Shango,  Oshun  and  Oko,  occupied 
the  minds  of  the  married  couple  and  the  primitive 
priest  farmer. 

(6)  And  now  we  arrive  at  a period  of  plenty, 
when  all  trees  are  bearing  fruit,  figured  by  the 
market  women  and  market  places  where  the  abun- 
dance of  the  products  brought  forth  by  the  waters 

1 Before  fire  was  used  for  cooking  purposes  and  man  knew  how  to  make 
it,  bush  fires  that  are  now  lighted  by  men,  would  not  occur  until  nearly 
the  end  of  the  dry  season,  when  natural  combustion  took  place. 


XVIII 


CONCLUSION 


217 


and  rains,  fish,  reptiles,  birds,  animals  and  vegetables 
were  sold.  And  Ajeshaluga,  as  we  have  noted, 
is  not  only  the  Orisha  of  wealth,  but  also  that  of 
colour,  which  needs  eyes  and  sight  to  recognise,  and 
which  is  best  represented  by  the  snakes  or  rainbows 
Oshumare  and  Ere.  I am  told  that  the  recognition 
of  the  different  colours  of  the  rainbow  is  a sign 
of  a high  stage  of  civilisation ; well,  this  is  the 
sixth  development  or  category  of  thoughts,  so  that 
my  informant  is  apparently  confirmed  in  his  state- 
ment. But  “ colour  ” means  more  to  the  Yoruba 
than  hue  and  tincture,  for  to  the  word  Awo  (Awaw) 
they  attach  the  meaning  of  outward  appearance, 
fashion,  likeness,  similitude  and  image.  The  Yoruba 
call  purple,  Awo  Aluko ; indigo,  Awo  Elu  (after 
the  indigo  plant) ; light  blue,  Awo  Ojuorun,  sky 
colour ; green,  Awo  Obedo,  vegetable  matter  on 
stagnant  pools  ; yellow,  Awo  Pupa  ; red,  Awo  Pupayo, 
and  another  name  for  reddish  purple  Awo  Pupa 
Rusurusu,  or  somewhat  red  colour.  I am  inclined 
to  think  that  this  interesting  word  Pupa,  red,  is  derived 
from  the  word  Po  or  Paw  to  be  plentiful  (fruit  is  most 
plentiful  when  it  is  ripe  and  red),  hence  the  word  Pon 
or  Pawn  to  be  red  or  ripe,  or  to  get  yellow. 

Thus  in  this  category  we  have  ideas  of  reproduction, 
colour,1  sight,  pregnancy,  weight,  harvest,  wealth,  buying 
and  selling. 

1 The  idea  of  colour  is  first  perhaps  obtained  from  the  Rainbow  Oshu- 
mare, who  is  reported  to  be  a great  snake  (tchama  in  the  Congo).  She 
is  said  to  send  her  slave  the  python  (Ere)  to  destroy  towns  and  collect 
slaves  and  food  for  her,  and  is  also  said  to  come  up  above  the  edge  of  the 
earth  to  drink  the  pure  water  of  the  sky.  In  the  Congo  the  six  colours 


2l8 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


(7)  In  this  development  we  have  a picture  of  death 
and  suffering,  destruction  and  construction,  figured  by 


which  they  recognise  are  said  to  be  six  snakes  (page  139  “At  the  Back 
of  the  Black  Man’s  Mind  ”).  These  colours  are  also  recognised  by  the 
Yoruba,  who  attach  some  significance  to  them.  When  a man  in  the 
Congo  is  grieving  over  some  misfortune  he  is  said  to  be  swelling.  We 
should  express  the  idea  by  saying  that  he  was  weighed  down  by  sorrow 
and  crying.  In  Yoruba  we  find  the  verb  Wu  is  to  swell  and  to  be  sullen, 
while  Wu  without  the  accent  is  to  howl  like  a dog.  When  the  father  dies 
his  relations  cry  out  Odo  Baba  O,  so  that  all  the  people  near  may  know 
that  the  head  of  the  family  is  dead,  and  then  the  mourners  do  not  wash, 
and  dress  in  dirty  dull  red  cloth,  their  nearest  approach  to  purple,  and  so 
show  their  respect  and  fear  of  the  departed.  And  people  seeing  this 
sympathise  with  them.  The  Yoruba  call  purple  Awo  Aluko,  or  the  colour 
of  a bird  called  Aluko.  As  we  have  noted,  burials  are  very  costly  affairs 
in  Yorubaland,  and  much  money  is  needed. 

Money  or  wealth  is  also  needed  for  the  purpose  of  purchasing  things  in 
the  market,  to  pay  the  priests  they  call  in  to  divine  for  them,  to  make 
presents  to  their  chiefs,  and  to  offer  sacrifices  to  their  Orishas  of  harvest, 
to  propitiate  the  Orisha  of  sickness,  and  to  thank  their  Orishas  of  birth. 

It  is  a remarkable  fact  that  the  prevailing  colour  in  the  markets,  as  that 
of  the  wearing  apparel  of  the  market  women,  is  indigo  blue,  and  its  popu- 
larity is  due  to  the  fact  that  the  wearing  of  cloth  of  this  colour  indicates 
that  the  wearer  is  fairly  well-to-do. 

Now  weighty  matters  are  discussed  in  these  markets,  and  the  sharp 
wits  of  buyers  are  pitted  against  the  cunning  of  the  seller,  but  the  most 
noticeable  feature  is  the  noise  caused  by  the  people  talking  to  one  another. 
And  so  the  ideas  of  intelligence,  speech  and  understanding  are  connected 
with  the  market  and  the  Indigo  colour. 

Another  weighty  matter,  as  all  will  recognise,  is  Religion.  Now  the 
priests  of  Ifa,  I am  told  by  Mr.  Taylor,  wear  light  blue  cloths,1  and  I 
have  also  noticed  more  than  one  instance  of  a Babalawo  dressed  in  cloth 
of  this  colour.  These  priests  who  play  so  great  a part  in  marriage 
believe  that  they  are  inspired,  and  their  grave  demeanour  impresses  this 
fact  upon  the  people.  Theirs,  in  the  olden  days,  was  the  office  of  smelling 
out  witches,  and  they  are  still  held  in  great  respect  as  Diviners.  And  so 
this  heavenly  colour  is  connected  with  Inspiration,  and  the  sense  of  smell, 
Divination  and  Religion  or  Marriage. 

Green  silk  is  the  favourite  colour  of  great  chiefs,  and  the  colour  is 
symbolical  of  the  season  of  conception  and  budding,  or  Spring.  The 
ordinary  individual  may  not  touch  the  sacred  person  of  a great  chief  or 


1 See  also  chapter  VIII,  page  96. 


XVIII 


CONCLUSION 


219 


Shankpana  or  Buruku,  sometimes  written  Buluku,  and 
Oba  or  Ibu.  Shankpana  is  in  the  first  place  the  slayer 
of  children,  in  the  second  the  smallpox  Orisha.  Bulu 
is  to  blow  vehemently  upon,  as  the  tornados  blow  upon 
the  trees,  etc.,  but  the  verb  Bu  is  not  only  to  spoil 
through  damp,  to  decay,  but  also  to  broil  or  bake  under 
hot  ashes  ; Ru  to  rise,  swell,  boil  over,  and  Kaw  or  Ku 
to  construct  ; Ibu,  the  name  of  the  river  sacred  to  Oba, 
means  she  that  bakes,  or  decays.  In  connection  with 
these  meanings  we  have  to  remember  that  these  Orishas 
in  the  cycle  represent  the  seventh  and  eighth  months, 
the  two  tornado  months  finishing  the  rain  season.  In 
propagation  these  months  are  much  feared,  as  children 
born  now  are  more  often  than  not  still-born.  Then 
fallen  fruits  damped  by  the  rain  and  heated  by  the  sun 
swell  up  and  rot.  I cannot,  of  course,  say  definitely 
that  from  this  nature-process  primitive  man  first  learnt 
how  to  make  his  bread  or  pounded  mass  by  heating  and 
beating  (Bulu  is  also  to  beat),  but  one  of  the  wives  of 
Shango  is  said  to  have  been  the  first  bread-maker,  and 
they  now  boil  cereals  or  yams,  and  then  pound  them 


Oba,  and  so  the  ideas  of  Authority,  the  sense  of  touch  and  conception, 
are  connected  with  the  green  of  springtime. 

The  farmers  watch  the  green  corn  turn  yellow  and  ripe  for  harvest, 
and  show  their  wisdom  and  discernment  in  its  ingathering  and  disposal, 
and  so  wisdom,  discernment,  the  sense  of  sight,  and  the  yellow  colour  of 
the  time  of  harvest  are  connected. 

Then  comes  the  time  when  all  fruits  are  ripe,  and  the  predominating 
colour  is  orange.  This,  especially  in  the  olden  days,  was  a time  of  great 
feasting,  tasting  and  appreciation,  and  discrimination,  for  all  fruits  were 
not  good,  many  of  them  being  harmful  if  not  poisonous. 

And,  finally,  the  last  harvest  was  connected  with  the  time  of  birth,  and 
the  gathering  of  the  red  coloured  palm  nut,  and  in  the  disposal  and 
harvesting  of  this  crop  the  farmers  and  traders  had  to  use  their  powers  of 
calculation,  sense  and  judgment. 


220 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


in  a mortar  to  make  what  serves  them  as  bread,  and 
the  meanings  of  the  words  Buluku  and  Ibu  point  in 
that  direction.  In  this  season  also  the  angry  winds  blow 
down  old  trees  and  many  branches,  all  of  which  would 
burn  easily  and  are  still  preferred  as  firewood.  This 
period  then  seems  to  have  been  one  of  destruction  and 
construction,  and  as  it  developed  gave  birth  to  makers 
of  bread,  potters,  hut  and  canoe  builders,  black- 
smiths, weavers  of  cloth.  The  verb  Towo  (Tawwo) 
not  only  means  to  taste,  but  also  to  anticipate  ; and  the 
word  is  composed  of  Taw  to  correct,  educate,  and  Wo 
which  means  to  fall  down  as  a tree  or  fruit,  or  Wo  to 
see,  which  seems  to  me,  if  we  take  into  consideration 
the  above  meanings  of  the  Orishas  and  the  season  of 
the  year,  that  the  Yoruba’s  idea  of  taste  commenced 
when  he  first  tickled  his  palate  with  the  juicy  fruits  of 
trees  that  had  fallen  to  the  ground.  This  is  perhaps 
made  clearer  when  we  find  that  (i)  The  words  for 
palate  are  I mo  (I  maw)  I towo  (I  tawwo)  the  sense  of 
taste  ; (2)  that  the  verb  Mo  means  to  drink,  and  (3) 
that  I mo  comes  to  mean  notion,  knowledge,  wisdom, 
science,  philosophy,  etc. 

It  seems  to  me  that  man  having  no  more  senses 
could  not  progress  further  in  this  direction  which,  for 
the  sake  of  clearness,  I will  call  the  perpendicular 
direction  of  the  cycle,  but  in  a parallel  way  develop- 
ment appears  to  be  indefinite  as  season  follows 
season. 

(1)  Thus  from  primitive  man’s  sense  of  hearing 
correctly  he  progresses  through  many  stages  of 
civilisation  to  that  of  the  right  hearing  which 


XVIII 


CONCLUSION 


221 


we  all  connect  with  our  Court  of  Equity  and 
Arbitration. 

(2)  From  a primitive  power  of  forming  ideas  he 
marches  on  to  right  thinking,  reason  and  justice, 
and  Courts  of  Justice. 

(3)  From  his  sense  of  smell  and  imagination  his 
primitive  superstition  may  take  him  through  different 
phases  of  marriage  and  of  love  to  an  at-one-ment 
with  a true  spiritual  God,  which  we  ourselves  have 
not  yet  reached. 

(4)  His  sense  of  touch  and  impression  may  carry 
him,  step  by  step,  from  the  fear  of  touching  his  sacred 
kings  and  rulers  to  obedience  to  law  and  order,  and 
a desire  to  serve  his  king  and  country,  and  ideas 
of  State. 

(5)  Through  sight,  colour  and  weight,  the  people 
may  proceed  little  by  little  from  their  primitive  and 
impulsive  meetings  in  the  market  places,  and  a 
representative  Council  or  Ogboni,  to  more  and  more 
civilised  meetings  and  discussions  of  the  affairs  of 
the  people  in  a great  and  more  perfect  House  of 
Commons  than  any  that  yet  exists. 

(6)  And,  finally,  their  sense  of  taste  may  carry 
them  from  a simple  meeting  of  elders  to  a House  of 
Lords,  composed  of  the  finest  intellects  in  all 
branches  of  thought  and  industries.  To  all  this  the 
natives  of  Africa  may  aspire  in  the  working  out 
of  their  own  salvation  as  a people,  if  some 
inherent  and  subtle  vice  does  not  arrest  their 
progress. 

Now  these  six  categories  may  be  reduced  to  three 


222 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


(i)  Hearing  and  Speech  may  be  headed  “Science  or 
thought.”  (2)  Smell  and  Touch  may  be  termed 
Religion.  And  (3)  Sight  and  Taste  may  figure  as 
Order. 


Science 

In  native  communities  we  have  the  hunter,  a brave 
man,  who  must  not  be  afraid  of  the  fairies  when  the 
whirlwind  blows  him  into  the  depths  of  the  forest 
and  into  their  presence,  so  that  he  may  learn  from  these 
departed  spirits  the  cure  for  certain  diseases.  This 
apothecary  goes  on  experimenting  and  collecting  facts 
and,  in  this  way,  is  a primitive  man  of  science.  He 
uses  his  knowledge  for  the  benefit  of  his  family. 
He  may  perhaps  be  called  a white  magician,  at  any 
rate  he  is  the  opposite  to  the  impostor  or  quack  who 
trades  on  the  ignorance  of  the  people  and  who  in  this 
way  is  a dealer  in  black  magic. 


Religion 

“ Increase  and  multiply  ” sums  up  primitive  Religion, 
which  is  in  this  way  bound  up  in  the  Creator  and 
motherhood.  We  have  noted  how  the  chief  duties 
of  the  Babalawos  or  priests  are  connected  with  marriage 
and  birth.  So  long  as  these  priests  confine  themselves 
to  these  moral  duties  for  the  benefit  of  their  people 
they  may  perhaps  be  called  white  magicians,  but  as 
soon  as  they  forget  their  priestly  duties  and  trust  to 
priestcraft  they  become  black  magicians. 


XVIII 


CONCLUSION 


223 


Law 

The  ruler  who  governs  his  people  scientifically  and 
religiously  in  accordance  with  the  natural  and  moral 
laws  handed  down  to  him  by  his  ancestors  may  be 
called  a white  magician,  but  the  ruler  who  attempts  to 
govern  his  people  by  means  of  secret  societies  that 
play  on  their  dread  of  death  becomes  a dealer  in  black 
magic. 

True  to  the  most  primitive  form  of  government,  i.e. 
that  of  father,  mother,  son,  we  conclude  that  these 
three  material  persons  symbolise  the  three  great 
spiritual  lines  of  thought,  i.e.  Science,  Religion,  and 
Law.  Law  then  is  the  offspring  of  Science  and 
Religion  and  may  be  said  to  be  contained  in  them. 
We  thus  arrive  at  the  great  “ duality  ” in  man. 

There  remains  the  Dowager  Queen  or  Iyalode. 
Iyalode  as  we  have  seen  is  the  relict  of  the  departed 
father  and  so  represents  or  symbolises  the  departed 
spirit.  We  have  further  noted  that  when  the  father 
dies  the  mourners  cry  out  Oro  O ! Baba  O ! and  by 
Baba  or  father  we  are  told  they  mean  the  first  great 
father  and  not  the  immediate  deceased.  In  this 
way  we  are  correct  in  concluding  that  the  Iyalode 
symbolises  the  first  great  founder  and  spirit  of  her 
husband’s  race. 

I now  refer  my  reader  to  page  237  in  At  the  Back 
of  the  Black  Man  s Mind , where  the  philosophy  will  be 
found  in  table  form. 

Environment  will  colour  each  of  these  six  “estates” 
in  each  perfect  kingdom,  and  each  “ estate  ” will  need 


224 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


many  reforms  before  it  is  in  itself  perfect.  The 
Administrator  learned  in  history  will  now  have  no 
difficulty  in  placing  the  West  Coast  African  in  his 
exact  position  in  the  historical  development  of  civilisa- 
tion, and  can  fearlessly  help  him  upward  on  what  he 
knows  to  be  natural  lines  and  nature  colouring.  We 
need  fear  no  danger  in  being  true  to  nature,  for  nature 
in  itself  is  true  to  the  Divine  inspiring  Will  of  the  Great 
Father  in  whom  we  all  believe.  Danger  arises  from 
the  impulsiveness  of  those  whose  true  instincts  have 
been  perverted,  and  in  whom  secondary  and  unnatural 
instincts  have  been  inculcated  by  association  with 
abnormal  situations,  such  as  slavery,  bad  living,  and  a 
wrong  form  of  education.  These  unfortunate  people, 
having  lost  the  principles  of  the  foundations  of  the  six 
estates,  think  that  no  form  of  government  is  necessary, 
and  imagine  that  by  destroying  the  divinely  inspired 
“ structure,”  or  parts  of  it,  they  will  in  some  way 
benefit.  But  if  we  believe  that  a kingdom  is  but  a 
conglomerate  form  of  estates,  the  output  of  the  senses 
in  man,  we  shall  at  once  realise  the  imbecility  and 
futility  of  the  endeavours  of  these  ignorant  people.  A 
state  can  gain  no  more,  for  instance,  from  the  abolition 
of  its  Church  or  Senate,  in  however  crude  and  un- 
developed a stage  these  estates  may  be,  than  an 
individual  can  from  the  destruction  of  his  senses  of 
smell  and  taste.  Such  a mutilated  kingdom  is  doomed 
to  fall  back  to  ruin  and  death  in  competition  with  one 
that  is  more  sensible  and  complete. 

Conquering  or  Protecting  Powers  have  enormous 
responsibilities  cast  upon  them,  for  it  is  to  them  and 


XVIII 


CONCLUSION 


225 


to  their  method  of  government  that  the  safety  and 
welfare  of  the  people  is  entrusted.  They  must  not 
destroy,  but  try  to  uplift.  A study  of  the  condition 
of  the  people  of  the  protected  states  is  therefore 
absolutely  necessary. 

The  people  themselves  through  disobedience  may 
easily  cause  all  the  efforts  of  the  best  of  protecting 
Governments  to  come  to  nought.  The  people  must 
believe  and  have  faith  in  “ the  powers  that  be,” 
though  they  have  the  right  to  join  in  the  prayer 
that  both  plaintiff  and  defendant,  among  the  Bavili, 
kneeling  and  clapping  their  hands  three  times, 
offer  to  their  king  who  has  just  given  judgment — 
“May  you  continue  to  keep  the  ‘seven’  well  in 
hand.” 

I will  now  conclude  by  asking  you  to  glance  at 
the  following  lists,  which  may  help  to  make  clear 
the  philosophy  at  the  back  of  the  Yoruba’s  mind. 

I am  sorry  that  I cannot  give  lists  of  the  sacred 
lands  and  rivers,  trees,  omens  and  animals,  as  in 
At  the  Back  of  the  Black  Mans  Mind , but  I think  I 
have  gathered  sufficient  traces  of  these  to  prove 
that  at  one  time  such  lists  did  exist.  The  Yoruba 
has  progressed  more  rapidly  in  the  race  of  civilisa- 
tion than  his  brother  in  the  Congo,  and  this  symbolic 
picture  of  his  philosophy  is  hard  now  to  find  in  a 
perfect  state  of  preservation. 


Q 


226 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


Yoruba  Development  of  Calendar. 


i st  Development. 

(Odudua 

Cl 

I fa 


xst 

day 

2nd 

33 

3rd 

33 

4th 

33 

Cycle 

17th 

or  ISt 

5th 

day 

Month, 

6th 

33 

14  of 

7th 

„ 

which  1 

8th 

33 

made  one 

9th 

33 

ancient 

10th 

33 

year 

1 ith 

33 

nth 

33 

13th 

33 

14th 

33 

15th 

33 

y I 6th 

„ 

2nd  Development. 


9th 


Ancient 

year 


1st 
2nd 
3rd 
4th 
5th 
6th 
7th 
,8  th 


Lunar 

year 


yd  Development. 


14th,  or 


1st  month 
2nd  ,, 


Rain" 


3rd 

4th 

5th 

6th 

7th 

8th 

9th 

10th 

nth 

nth 

13th 


33 

>3 

33 

33 

33 

33 


33 

33 


God’s  Ogboni,  or  the  Great  Orishas. 


Olorun,  Owner 
of  Heaven 


Sun  or 

rOdudua 
J akuta 

Originator 

Obatala 

Moon  Oshu 

Ha 

Eshu 

Aganju 

Creator 

Yemoja 

Star 

Orungan 

Dada  things  created 

Olosa 

Olokun 

Oshowsi 

Procreator  ■ 

Star 

Ogun 

Oke 

Shango 

Oshun 

Star 

Oko 

Oya 

Ajeshaluga 

Oba 

Shankpana  or  Erinle 

1 i am  here  adhering  to  the  formula  given  by  Oliyitan,  see  list  of  Odus. 


xvin 


CONCLUSION 


227 


Abeokuta  Hunters’  Ogboni  or  the  Egbe  Oluri  Ode. 


Iyalode  ? 

Akoka  or  Alake  ? 

Balogun  ? 
Bashorun  ? 

Oyieshile 
Bi  eye  oku 
Ojo 

Ogbolo 


The  Priests  o 

Priests. 

Oluwo  Osi  Awo 
Oluwo  otun  Awo 
Olopon  ekeji  Awo 
Babalawo 

Babalawo 

Olowo 

Odofin 

Aro 

The  accused 

Ajigbona 

Assistant 

Aworo 

Assistant 

Asarepawo 

Assistant 

Asawo 

Assistant 

r Apetebi 
Assistant 
? 

L Assistant 


The  hunter  accused 

Hunter 

Assistant 

Hunter 

Assistant 

Hunter 

Assistant 

Hunter 

Assistant 

Hunter 

Assistant 

Hunter 

Assistant 

I FA  AND  THE  ODUS. 

Odus. 

j-  Orun 
Odu 

Ogbe  meji 

Oyeku 

Iwori 

Odin  or  Edi 

(Iroshun 
Owonrin 
Obara 
Okonron 

Oguda 
Osa 
Ika 

Oturupon 

(Otura 
Irete 
Oshe 
Ofu 


Q 2 


228 


NIGERIAN  STUDIES 


CHAP. 


The  Aro  or  Owe  of  the  Farmers. 


f 

1 = 

{Ashipa 
Oba  wungu 
Oluri 
Ekeri 


The  farmer  accused 
Farmer 
Assistant 
Farmer 
Assistant 

Farmer 

Assistant 

Farmer 

Assistant 

Farmer 

Assistant 

Farmer 

Assistant 


The  Market  Women  and  People’s  Ogboni  or  the  Sense 
Common  to  All. 


Sensation 


Mind 


Body 


Spirit  of  departed 
Wisdom  or  science 
Faith  or  Religion 
Obedience  or  Law 
Action 
Execution 
Propagation 
Proclamation 

Nervous  system 


I Inception 


Conception 


^ Fulfilment 


Hearing 

Association 

Speaking 

Ideation 

Smelling 

Imagination 

Touching 

Impression 

Seeing 

Reproduction 

Tasting 

Construction 


XVIII 


CONCLUSION 

The  King’s  Ogboni. 


229 


Native  form  of 
Government, 
of  which  the 
Oba  is  the 
head 


Council 

or 

Ogboni 


Executive 


f Iyalode,  the  Queen 
Dowager 
J Oba,  the  King 

Balogun,  the  War  Chief 
Bashorun,  the  Prime 
Minister 


Legislative 


President,  the  Bashorun 
Akpena,  who  convenes  the 
meeting 

Oluwo,  the  Treasurer 
Odofin,  the  Arbitrator 


Justice 

and 

Life 


Church 

and 

Marriage 


Death 

and 

Offspring 


The  Plaintiff 


Lisa,  Iwarefa 
Egbe  „ 
Bisa  „ 
Egbe  „ 


Or  Assistant 


Bala 

Egbe 

Asalu 

Egbe 


55 

55 

55 

55 


Malukun  „ 
Egbe  „ 
Ashipa  „ 
Egbe  „ 


Possible  Direction  of  Development. 


Head  of  the  Church 
The  King 

The  Lord  Chancellor 
The  Prime  Minister 

The  Prime  Minister 
The  Speaker 

The  Chancellor  of  Exchequer 
The  Lord  Chief  Justice 
The  People  or  Nation 


The  Court  of  Equity 


The  Courts  of  Justice 


The  Church 


The  State 


The  Commons 


The  House  of  Lords 


ADDENDUM 

THE  SMALL  POX  GOD. 

How  Its  Priests  and  Priestesses  Ply  Their 
Inhuman  Trade.1 

Suggestions  for  putting  an  end  to  this  traffic  in  human  lives. 

The  method  of  effecting  the  cure  of  the  Small  Pox  disease 
among  the  Yorubas  was  known  only  to  a class  of  men  (priest 
and  priestesses)  who  make  a big  trade  of  the  affair  by  eleva- 
ting the  small  pox  into  a god.  One  tradition  states  that 
Shoponna  (Small  Pox)  was  a very  wicked  boy  who  often 
excited  great  commotions  in  his  town.  On  one  occasion 
after  he  had  beaten  to  death  several  of  his  townspeople,  he 
was  taken  by  his  parents  and  sold  to  a native  doctor  who 
taught  him  the  use  of  very  bad  and  poisonous  drugs. 

With  these  he  effected  the  death  of  most  of  his  fellow 
citizens.  No  one  dared  mourn  the  death  of  these  victims  but 
will  suffer  deprivation  of  his  house  and  property ; and  worse 
still  the  relative  of  the  deceased  while  in  that  house  of  mourn- 
ing has  to  pay  Shoponna  and  his  master  a congratulatory 
visit  thanking  them  for  having  claimed  a victim  from  their 
midst.  Hence  the  small  pox  is  offer  termed  Alapadupe  (a 
man  who  kills  and  is  thanked  for  the  killing).  After  his 
death  the  shoponna  was  deified  and  worshipped. 

The  following  materials  can  be  found  in  the  house  of  every 
small  pox  priest  or  priestess  as  emblems  of  the  presence  of 
this  god: — 1.  A calabash  containing  some  portion  or  portions 
of  the  carcase  of  a small  pox  victim  such  as  the  elbow  right 
on  to  the  palm  of  the  hand  ; and  the  ankle  right  on  to  the 
palm  of  the  foot.  2.  A pot  containing  some  black  liquid 
which  is  made  up  of  water  collected  from  the  body  of  the 
corpse  or  that  with  which  the  deceased  was  washed  when 
alive.  3.  A small  vessel  of  black  powder  compounded  from 
the  trash  of  the  small  pox  after  it  is  dried  up.  It  is  the 

1 From  The  Nigerian  Chronicle , February  25,  1910. 


232 


ADDENDUM 


water  or  powder  that  is  always  thrown  during  night  time  in 
front  of  the  houses  of  individuals  who  are  spotted : the 
inmates  inhale  the  germs  during  the  day  when  at  work  or  at 
play  and  in  this  way  the  infection  is  caught  on.  Immediately 
the  rash  is  seen  on  any  one  a priest  or  priestess  is  to  attend 
on  him  and  in  nine  cases  out  of  ten  helps  to  spread  the 
disease  rather  than  check  it.  It  is  more  to  his  or  her  interest 
to  do  this,  for  apart  from  the  heavy  amount  he  receives  for 
medical  attendance,  he  claims  for  himself  all  the  personal 
effects  of  his  patient  in  case  he  succumbs. 

These  priests  do  not  bury  the  dead  but  throw  the  corpses 
into  the  bush  to  be  devoured  either  by  carrions  or  pigs  who 
sometimes  drag  the  inedible  portions  into  the  town  and 
in  front  of  houses.  In  this  way  is  the  disease  made  to 
spread  and  priests  drive  a very  lucrative  trade.  When  a few 
years  ago  the  Government  compelled  some  people  in  a 
hinterland  town  to  bury  these  corpses,  the  priest  often  found 
it  necessary  to  dig  a dozen  or  more  graves  daily  to  await  the 
news  of  small  pox  victims. 

Unless  the  Government  track  these  wicked  priests  to  their 
very  recesses  in  the  farms  of  the  Yoruba  towns — and  there 
are  a great  number  of  them  in  Abeokuta,  Ijebu  and  Ibadan 
farms — and  burn  up  their  materials  and  houses  of  worship, 
the  small  pox  disease  will  ever  continue  its  ravages  in  this 
quarter  of  Southern  Nigeria.  It  is  not  enough  to  arrest 
worshippers  in  large  towns  like  Abeokuta  only.  Those  found 
there  are  but  the  disciples  of  the  real  worshippers.  Let  the 
Government  pursue  them  into  their  strongholds  in  the  Egba 
and  other  farms,  if  this  epidemic  is  to  be  checked.  A capita- 
tion fee  paid  to  any  successful  detective  under  this  head,  I am 
sure,  will  bring  the  desired  end. 


ADESOLA. 


qerian  Studies" 

~2°~ 


12° 


ZUNGERU/ 


id* 


Kaiarrut® 


‘iiuho 


R 


'o  Kagherho 

T 


H 


j 


j 


' Shake 


Jebba\ 

307 


{ lllorirv] 

246fe 


E 


R 


1 o 


Yo‘a 


Wase\ 


Lcuc 


KefH 


Nassarawo 

G 


R 


OgboTTvoshoc 


A 


Useyirc 1 


E S T 


blherurt 
Wshogbo^ 


foiKerurb 

Iwo 
o 

/RovrteE 


vj6ho 


dbi 


Ba 


. \|l 

(Kahbcc  o Lokojal 


<s>Dekincc 


(* 


< 


Aroj 

Abeokula  I 

® .debit  Od&^r- 

A Undo ) V 
f ( ®(  X 

/ 

X df)Wg  l 

1 / 

( 

Shaganuc 
Btorodic  ) 

1 n 

7 ^\IfonA$  / 

/ j ^ 

/ 

/ 

Ubiajctjl 

ufdah 


i Katsencc  AUah  s ' 


a Okwoga  ; 


)o  Ogrugnc 


®Obiuta 


iAGOS 


E N /T  R 

/Benin  City 


\Sapele 


From  /4c£ty- 


BIGHT  OF  BE 


R EFERENCE 


Railway  constructed. 

Railway  under  construction 

Telegraph  constructed. 

Telegraph  under  construction  1909 _ 

Telegraph  to  be  constructed  1910 

Headquarters  of  Administrative  Districts . 
Colony  of  Southern  Nigeria 


R.  6^'° 

R.  Forcados' 
Foret 


R.  Dodo 
. R.  Middleton 


INC 

®Kwale 


r .ZEfc  A 

AFikpo ^^Edzba 

oOkig-wi 


/ CAMEROON'S 

r 

( German ) 


Bende 
iLOwerri 


V 


OUTLINE  MAP 

j 7 I of 

^Uwet  _ / 7 THE  COLONY  and  PROTECTORATE 

OF  


Oban,  X/ 


OUTHERN  NIGERIA 

1910  


- 5 


Akassa^f I 


/VuntpV 


Fro^Light  House' 


R.«>0 


7 7 


)>Opobo 

A A ^ 


Scale  of  Miles 


I I 1 L. 


2°  E 


10° 


12° 


H(  H.  Beverley,  Capt.  ,1.0.,  S.N. 


London:  Macmillan  & Co.  Ltd.. 


Stanfords  Geog!  Estab% London. 


INDEX 


INDEX 


Abeokuta,  7,  14,  44,  45,  51,  62,  85, 
92,  1 12,  159,  164,  193,  204 
Adesola,  28,  31,  35,  36,  41,  55,  59, 
87 

Aganju,  97,  100,  101,  226 
Agbarigbo,  103,  144 
Ajele,  194,  199,  201-204 
Ajeshaluga,  ioi,  102,  143-145,  191, 
217,  226 

Alafin,  6,  8,  58,  91,  92,  1 99-201,  204 
Alake,  12,  14,  77,  92,  112,  192,  227 
Alaketu,  12,  13,  76,  77,  92 
Alashe,  22,  23,  104. 

Alldridge,  T.  J.,  55,  59 
Awnomila.  See  Orunmila 

Babalawo,  2,  26,  46-48,  71,  90,  93, 
149,  I5i>  152,  165,  167,  174,  178, 
180,  218,  222,  227 

Bale,  17,  199,  201-204,  206-208,  216 
Balogun,  15,  61-64,  85,  105,  173,  193, 
206,  227,  229 

Barbot,  61,  67,  107-109,  132 
Bashorun,  61-64,  97,  I05>  151,  193, 
226,  229 
Basuto,  57 

Bavili,  58,  69,  82,  85,  120,  157,  191, 
210,  213,  225 
Bellamy,  C.  V.,  126-129 
Bini,  9,  39,  56,  62,  63,  66,  76,  80,  82, 
108,  no,  121,  148,  157,  199 
Birth,  136,  167,  168 
Blacksmith,  125-129,  214 
Blyden,  Dr.  E.  W.,  156 
Bosman,  68,  132,  138,  157,  167 
Bull-roarer,  28,  33-53 
Burial  customs,  28-33,  36,  41-44,  56- 
58,  176,  189,  219. 

Buruku,  71,  79,  102,  219 

Calendar,  60,  63,  77-80.  100- 104, 
i30-i39,  I9B  215,  226 


Campbell,  D.  R. , 198 
Categories,  1 5 1,  152,  190,  191,  215, 
220-225 

Chimpanzee,  34,  35 
Circumcision,  167,  168 
Colour,  217-219 
Cotton,  E.  P.,  170,  197 
Crawley,  3 

Creation,  17,  18,  74,  83 
Crowther,  Bishop,  45,  73,  77,  81,  82, 
86,  90,  145,  210 


Dada,  ioi,  102,  144,  168,  189,  190, 
226 

Dahomi,  7 
Divination,  148,  149 

Egba,  7,  14,  29,  36,  37,  41,  43,  51,  53, 
91,  93,  140,  142,  164,  192,  200,  204, 
206 

Egbo,  55 

Egun,  28,  29,  30,  33,  183 
Egungun,  28-33,  36,  54,  56,  58,  104 
Eleda,  17,  18,  74,  86,  147 
Elegba,  94,  95,  100,  103 
Eleko,  28 

Elgee,  Captain,  24,  25 
Ellis,  Colonel,  33,  46,  51,  70,  73,  74, 
77-79,  81,  86,  87,  95,  98,  101-103, 
no,  hi,  114,  123,  148-150,  158, 
159,  168,  170,  214 
Eluku,  55,  56,  58 
Erinle,  188-190,  226 
Eshu,  25,  26,  77,  78,  93-97,  100-102, 
104,  117,  1 5 1 , 170,  186,  226 
Ewaw,  170,  175-188 
Execution,  41,  43,  45 

Farming,  130-133,  138-145,  215,  216 
Fire,  216 

Fishing,  106-114,  133,  198,  211,  212 


233 


234 


INDEX 


Flood,  1 14,  XI5 

Food  plants,  131,  133,  138,  139 
Frazer,  J.  G.,  159,  175 

George,  Mr.,  153 

Government,  61,  62,  91,  92,  97,  105, 
192-194 

Grove  (Sacred),  19-22,  25,  150 

Haddon,  Dr.,  38 
Hartze,  H.,  55 
Hausa  States,  11 
Healy,  J.  J.  C. , 196 
History,  6-16 

Hunting,  116-123,  198,  213,  214 

Ibadan,  8,  43,  51,  159,  162,  188,  200, 
201-204 
Ibibio,  176 

Ifa,  2,  3,  18,  19,  63,  64,  71,  73,  78,  80, 
86-97,  100-104,  no,  1 14,  115,  1 18, 
123,  137,  147-155.  164,  165,  167, 
170,  176,  181,  184,  191,  218,  226, 
227 

Ife,  8,  11,  15,  19,  22-27,  69,  77,  87, 
89,  201 

Ijebu,  8,  55,  89,  92,  93,  200,  203,  204 
Iketu,  8 
Ilesha,  8 
Ilorin,  8 

Initiation  Ceremonies,  38-40,  56 
Insignia,  192,  193 
Iro,  28,  34-36,  104,  172,  173 
Iron-working,  125-129 

Jakuta,  12,  17,  63-68,  71-72,  77-79, 
97,  99,  101,  124,  137,  138,  169,  206 
Johnson,  Bishop,  63,  73,  81,  86,  87, 
148,  149,  152,  170 

Keribo,  88,  158 
Kingsley,  Mary,  108 

Lagos,  8-10 
Land  tenure,  195-208 
Leopard,  120,  192 
Lishabi,  7,  8 

Malu,  38 
Market,  80 

Marriage,  156-162,  165-167,  175-182, 
191,  216. 

Mbundu,  56 

Mohammedanism,  II,  12,  75 
Morimi,  22,  23 

Niepos  ara  Orun,  51 
Nkimbi,  53 


Oba  (Chief),  61-64,  105,  199,  219,  229 
Oba  (Orisha),  101,  102,  144,  168,  169, 
189-191,  219,  226 

Obatala,  63,  64,  69,  71,  73,  74,  78,  79, 
81-86,  97,  100,  101,  103,  114,  132, 
147,  167,  170,  181,  186,  226 
Odedaino,  165 

Odu,  2,  4,  73,  80,  88-90,  no,  147-152, 
191,  226,  227 

Odudua,  n,  18,  19,  58,  63,  65,  71,  73- 
77,  79,  80,  82-84,  87,  96,  97,  99, 
101,  104,  in,  115,  147,  170,  172, 
173,  186,  214,  226 

Ogboni,  32,  34,  37,  40-42,  44,  45,  57, 
62,  91,  92,  97,  98,  101,  104,  105, 
123,  152,  193,  221,  226-229 
Ogun,  19,  78-80,  101,  102,  104,  116- 
119,  123-125,  136,  144,  153,  169, 
171-173,  180,  182,  183,  191,  213, 
214,  226 

Oja  (priestess),  3,  17,  77,  86,  87,  147, 
170 

Oja,  13 

Oke,  101-104,  143,  144,  158,  159,  162, 
164,  180,  191,  216,  226 
Oko,  101-104,  143,  144,  158,  159,  164, 
166,  180,  187,  191,  216,  226 
Oliyitan,  2,  71,  78,  91,  93,  149,  191, 
226 

Oloawon,  39,  40 
Olodumare,  83 
Oloko,  202 

Olokun,  70,  101-103,  no,  in,  113, 
144,  180,  190,  210,  212,  226 
Olorun,  12,  17,  18,  46,  48,  67,  72,  86, 
226 

Olosa,  101,  102,  hi,  113,  115,  144, 
180,  190,  212,  226 
Oloyo,  12,  14,  76 
Omens,  113,  118,  119 
Omonide,  12,  14,  75-77 
Oni,  19,  22-25,  27,  39,  77,  87,  90- 
92 

Onile,  202-205 
Oranyan,  24,  26,  90,  104,  170 
Ore,  19,  21,  22 
Orisha,  3,  et passim 

Orishala,  18,  19,  73,  77-79,  81-85, 
103,  104,  173,  186 

Oro,  28,  29,  33-59,  104,  154,  181, 
188 


Oru,  13,  14 

Orun,  69,  72,  95,  98,  101 
Orungan,  69,  97,  98,  100,  101,  115,210, 
226, 


Orunmila  (Awnomila),  26,  87,  90,  148, 
150,  153 

Oshowsi,  101,  102,  104,  117,  123-125, 
144,  180,  191,  213,  226 


INDEX 


235 


Oshu,  94,  95,  101,  1 5 1 , 213,  226 
Oshun,  101-104,  144,  168,  169,  174, 
175,  187,  189,  191,  216,  226 
Ovia,  39,  40,  56 

Oya,  101,  102,  104,  144,  168,  169,  184, 
185,  191,  226 

Oyo,  7,  76,  89,  91,  93,  126,  169,  170, 
199,  200 

Parkinson,  J.,  46 

Pellegrin,  Mr.,  37,  42,  83,  171,  204 

Phillips,  Bishop,  87,  110,  148-150 

Poro,  55-56 

Property,  142 

Punch,  C.,  52 

Rainbow,  217 
Rayner,  T.  C.,  196 

Sacrifice,  23,  31,  34,  37,  44,  47-49, 
70,  94,  102,  hi,  1 1 7,  123,  124,  143, 
152,  163,  169,  182-188,  194 
Saintyves,  P. , 67 
Salt,  140 

Secret  Societies,  28,  29,  31,  32,  36,  38, 
51,  55-57,  122,  123,  143 
Senses,  210,  21 1,  220,  221 


Shango,  12,  58,  65,  67,  72,  78,  79,  92, 
101-104,  123,  144,  168-173,  181, 
185,  189-191,  216,  219,  226 
Shankpana,  71,  101,  102,  144,  187, 
189-191,  219,  226 
Shoremakun,  180 
Slaves,  205 

Stone,  Rev.  R.  H. , 45 
Stones,  Sacred,  3,  18,  19,  22,  27,  66,  67, 
90,  95 

Taboo,  see  Ewaw 
Tarahumake,  57 
Tasso,  56 

Thunderbolts,  65,  68,  136-138,  168 
Togun,  3,  17,  1 8,  24,  26,  67,  73,  77, 
81,  86 

Tucker,  Miss,  44 
Twins,  35 

Westermark,  57 
Winds,  65-71 

Yemoja,  65,  71,  78,  79,  97-105,  1 1 3— 
1 15,  144,  152,  168,  170,  188,  210, 
226 

Yemuhu,  18,  73,  74,  147 
Yoruba  States  Origin,  10,  12 


R.  CLAY  AND  SONS,  LTD.,  BREAD  ST.  HILL,  E.C.  AND  BUNGAY,  SUFFOLK. 


