NYU  IFA  LIBRARY 


3  1162  04539979  8 


S  OF  A 


NEW  YORK  UNIVERSITY 


mil  M'iii 


PRESENTED  BY 


THE  SOCIETY  FOR  THE  LIBRARIES 


By    the    same    Author 
U n i form  with  this  Work  : 

OSIRIS  AND  THE  EGYPTIAN 
RESURRECTION.  2  Volumes 
With    coo    Illustrations 

LONDON:  PHILIP  LEE  WARNER 
PUBLISHER    TO    THE    MEDICI     SOCIETY,    LTD. 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  DEAD: 

THE  PAPYRUS  OF  ANI,  SCRIBE 
AND  TREASURER  OF  THE  TEMPLES 
OF    EGYPT,    ABOUT    B.C.    1450 

IN    TWO    VOLUMES        VOLUME    I 


B 


00  V-       ^ 


T     \\r\e    cLea^A.. 


HE  PAPYRUS  OF  ANI 

A    REPRODUCTION  IN  FACSIMILE 
EDITED,      WITH      HIEROGLYPHIC 

TRANSCRIPT,  TRANSLATION  AND 

INTRODUCTION,  BY  SIR  E.  A.  WALLIS  BUDGE 
M.A.,  LITT.D.,  KEEPER  OF  THE  EGYPTIAN  AND 
ASSYRIAN  ANTIQUITIES  IN  THE  BRITISH 
MUSEUM.  PUBLISHED  BY  PERMISSION  OF 
THE  TRUSTEES  OF  THE  BRITISH   MUSEUM 


LONDON:    THE    MEDICI    SOCIETY,    LTD. 
NEW    YORK:     G.    P.    PUTNAM'S    SONS 


Fine  Arts 

P3^555 

.N-3 

\^\^ 

v.\ 

Cobv    Ol 

/^^^i, ..!:_. 


PRINTED   IN    GREAT   BRITAIN 
1913 


PREFACE 


The  Papyrus  of  Ani,  which  was  acquired  by  the  Trustees 
of  the  British  Museum  in  1888,  is  the  largest,  the  most 
perfect,  and  the  best  illuminated  of  all  the  papyri  con- 
taining copies  of  the  Theban  Recension  of  the  Book  of  the 
Dead.  Its  rare  Vignettes,  Hymns,  and  Chapters,  and  its 
descriptive  Rubrics,  render  it  of  unique  importance  for  the 
study  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead,  and  it  holds  a  very  high 
place  among  the  funerary  papyri  that  were  written  between 
B.C.  1500  and  B.C.  1350.  Although  it  contains  less  than 
one-half  of  the  Chapters  which  formed  the  Great  Corpus  of 
texts  written  for  the  benefit  of  the  dead,  we  may  conclude 
that  Ani's  exalted  official  position,  as  Chancellor  of  the 
ecclesiastical  revenues  and  endowments  of  all  the  Temples 
of  Thebes  and  Abydos,  will  have  ensured  the  inclusion  of 
all  the  Chapters  which  an  educated  Egyptian  deemed 
essential  for  salvation.  The  Papyrus  of  Ani  is,  in  short, 
typical  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead  in  vogue  among  the 
Theban  nobles  of  his  time. 

The  first  edition  of  the  Facsimile  of  the  Papyrus  was 
issued  in  1890,  and  was  exhausted  rapidly.  A  second 
edition  of  the  Facsimile  appeared  in  1894,  and  a  few  months 
later  the  Trustees  issued  a  stout  quarto  volume  containing 
a  detailed  description  of  the  Papyrus,  an  English  transla- 
tion with  notes,  and  a  general  Introduction,  treating  of  the 
history  of  the  Book,  of  the  Dead,  and  giving  a  brief  account 
of  the  religious  beliefs  of  the  Ancient  Egyptians. 

In  recent  years  there  has  been  a  growing  demand  for 
a  Facsimile  of  the  Papyrus  of  Ani  in  a  form  convenient  for 
use  by  beginners  and  students,  and  at  a  reasonable  price. 
As  the  second  edition  of  the  Facsimile  in  folio,  and  the 
edition  of  the  accompanying  volume  of  English  text,  are 
now  practically  exhausted,  the  Trustees  of  the  British 
Museum  were  asked  to  sanction  the  issue  of  the  present 
edition.  This  they  have  done,  and  they  have  also 
permitted  the  use  of  the  black  and  white  vignettes  which 


A     8  8  4  5 


VI 


Preface 


appeared  in  the  text  volume,   and  the    reprinting    of  any 
sections  which  were  necessary. 

Vol.  I  of  the  present  edition  contains  : — 

a.  The  general  Introduction,  with  chapters  on  the 
History  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead  and  on  the 
Egyptian  Religion. 

b.  A  full  description  of  the  Papyrus  of  Ani,  plate 
by  plate. 

c.  The  Coloured  Facsimile  in  37  folding  plates. 

Vol.  II  contains  a  complete  transcript  of  the  Papyrus 
in  hieroglyphic  type,  with  English  translations,  notes,  etc., 
and  an  Index. 

In  preparing  the  material  for  these  volumes  a  new  copy 
of  the  text  has  been  made,  and  supplementary  Chapters 
and  Sections  have  been  added  from  the  funerary  papyri 
that  have  been  acquired  by  the  Trustees  since  1892. 
The  translations  have  been  rewritten,  and  the  notes  have 
been  corrected  and  amplified  in  the  light  of  recent  dis- 
coveries. The  greater  part  of  the  Introduction  has  alsa 
been  rewritten,  and  the  entire  work  thus  becomes  truly  a 
"  New  Edition,"  fully  revised  to  the  date  of  issue. 


E.  A.  Wallis  Budge. 


British  Museum, 

August  12th,   1 91 3. 


CONTENTS   OF   VOLUME   I 


Preface 
Introduction  : 

The  Recensions  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead 
The  Legend  of  Osiris... 
Appendix     I — Hymn  to  Osiris 

„  11. — Osiris   and    his    Principal   Forms    under 

THE  XVIIIth  Dynasty... 

The  Doctrine  of  Eternal  Life 

Egyptian  Ideas  about  God  and  the  "Gods" 

Appendix.     List  of  the  Gods  whose  Names  were  Recited 

BY  THE  Deceased  to  Perfect  his  Spirit-Soul 
The  Abode  of  the  Blessed    ... 
The  Gods  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead 
The   Principal  Geographical  and  Mythological  Places 

in  the  Book  of  the  Dead 
Funeral  Ceremonies    ... 
The  Papyrus  of  Ani,   its  Date  and  Contents... 
Description  of  the  Plates     ... 
List  of  Hymns  and  Chapters 


Page 

V 

I 
52 
59 

61 
66 
99 

125 
130 
161 

202 
207 
217 
231 


The  Papyrus  of  Ani.     Reproduction  in  37  Coloured  Plates  at  end 


INTRODUCTION 

THE  RECENSIONS  OF  THE  BOOK  OF  THE 

DEAD 

The  Recensions  of  the  great  body  of  religious  com- 
positions, which  were  drawn  up  for  the  use  of  dead  kings, 
nobles,  priests,  and  others,  and  which  form  the  Book 
of  the  Dead  of  the  Ancient  Egyptians  may  be  thus 
summarized  : — 

I.  The  Heliopolitan  Recension,  i.e.,  that  which 
was  edited  by  the  priests  of  the  College  of  Anu  (the  On 
of  the  Bible,  and  the  Heliopolis  of  the  Greeks),  and 
which  was  based  upon  a  series  of  texts  now  lost.  It  is 
found  cut  in  hieroglyphs  upon  the  walls  of  the  chambers 
and  corridors  of  the  pyramid  tombs  ^  of  certain  kings  ^  of 
the  Vth  and  Vlth  dynasties.  It  represents  the  system  of 
theology  promulgated  by  the  priests  of  Ra  the  Sun-god, 
but  all  the  essential  elements  in  it,  with  the  exception 
of  the  solar  doctrines,  are  derived  from  the  primitive, 
indigenous,  and  probably  predynastic,  Egyptians.  In  the 
texts  of  the  later  kings  we  find  that  the  priests  of  Ra 
were  obliged  to  acknowledge  the  supremacy  of  Osiris, 
whose  cult,  even  under  the  earliest  dynasties,  was  very 
general  in  Upper  and  Lower  Egypt. 

Under  the  Xlth  and  Xllth  dynasties  sections  of  the 
Pyramid  Texts,  with  titles  in  which  they  are  styled 
"  Chapters,"  were  written  in  cursive  hieroglyphs  upon 
sarcophagi  and  coffins,^  and  to  these  were  added  a  number 

^  Hence  known  as  the  "  Pyramid  Texts." 

^  I.e.,  Unas,  Teta,  Pepi  I,  Mehti-em-sa-f,  and  Pepi  II.  Their 
pyramids  were  cleared  out  by  MM.  Mariette  and  Maspero  during  the  years 
18S0-84,  and  the  hieroglyphic  texts  were  published,  with  a  French  trans- 
lation, in  Reciieil  de  Travanx,  tt.  III-XIV,  Paris,  1882-93.  A  revised 
edition  of  the  text  has  been  recently  published  by  Sethe,  Pyratfiiden/exie, 
Leipzig,  1908-1910. 

^  In  the  Xlth,  Xllth,  and  Xlllth  dynasties  many  monuments  are 
inscribed  with  sections  of  the  Unas  text.  Thus  11.  206-69  ^.re  found  in 
hieroglyphs  upon  the  coffin  of  Amamu  (British  Museum,  No.  6654 ; 
VOL.  I.  B 


The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

of  Chapters  which  appear  to  have  been  composed  during 
the  interval  between  the  Vlth  and  Xlth  dynasties.  The 
treatment  of  the  older  texts,  and  the  character  of  the 
newer  texts  may  be  studied  in  the  excellent  transcripts 


H^ 


see  Birch,  Egyptian  Texts  of  the  Earliest  Period  from  the  Coffin  of 
Amamu,  1886,  Plates  XVII-XX);  11.  206-14  ^^d  268-84  on  the  coffin  of 

,  Apa-ankh,   from    Sakkarah   (see   Lepsius,   Denhndler,    II, 

Bl.  99/^;  Maspero,  Eecueil,  t.  Ill,  pp.  200  and  214  ff.);  U.  206-10  and 
268-89  on  the  coffin  of  Antef  (see  Lepsius,  Denkmiiler,  II,  Bl.  145;  Maspero, 
Eeaieit,  t.  Ill,  pj).  200,  214) ;  1.  206  on  a  coffin  of  Menthu-hetep  at  Berlin 
(see  Lepsius,  Aelteste  Texte,  Bl.  5);  11.  269-94  on  the  sarcophagus  of  Heru- 
hetep  (see  Maspero,  Memoires,  t.  I,  p.  144).  A  section  is  found  on  the 
walls  of  the  tomb  of  Queen  Neferu  (see  Maspero,  Recueil,  t.  Ill,  pp.  201  ff. ; 
Mimoires^  t.  I,  p.   134);  other  sections  are  found  on  the  sarcophagus  of 

Z3  (I,  Taka  (see  Lepsius,  JDefikmiiler,  II,  BU.  147,  148;  Maspero, 

Guide  au  Visiteur,  p.  224,  No.  1053  ;  Mhnoires,  t.  I,  p.  134);  11.  5-8  occur 

on  the  stele  of  Apa   [J  □  Ij   (see  Ledrain,  Monuments  Agyptiens  de  la  Bibl. 

Nationale,  Paris,  1879, foil.  ^4)  i5)j  ^-  166  ff.  are  found  on  the  stele  of  Nehi 
(see  Mariette,  Notice  des  Moti.  a  JBoulaq,  p.  190  ;    Maspero,  Reaieil,  t.  Ill, 

p.   195);  and  11.  576-83  on  the  coffin  of  Sebek-Aa 

(see  Lepsius,  Aelteste  Texte,  Bl.  37  ;  Maspero,  Reaieil,  t.  IV,  p.  68).  In 
the  XVIIIth  dynasty  1.  169  was  copied  on  a  wall  in  the  temple  of 
Hatshepset  at  Der  al-Bahari  (see  Diimichen,  Hist.  Inschriften,  Bll.  25-37  ; 
Maspero,  Recueil,  t.  I,  pp.  195  ff.)  ;  and  copies  of  II.  379-99  occur  in  the 
papyri  of  Mut-hetep  (British  Museum,  No.  looio)  and  Nefer-uben-f  (Paris, 
No.  3092.  See  Naville,  Todtenbuch,  Bd.  I,  Bl.  197  ;  Aeg.  Zcitschrift, 
Bd.  XXXII,  p.  3  ;  and  Naville,  Einleitung,  pp.  39,  97).  In  the  XXVIth 
dynasty  ^ye  find  texts  of  the  Vth  dynasty  repeated  on  the  walls  of  the  tomb 
of  Peta-Amen-apt,  the  chief  kher-heb  at  Thebes  (see  Diimichen,  Der 
Grabpalast  des   Patuamenap    in    der    Thebanischen    Nekropolis,     Leipzig, 

1884-85) ;  and  also  upon  the  papyrus  written  for  the  lady  Sais 


,   about  A.D.   200  (see  Devdria,    Catalogue   des   MSS.   AgyptienSy 

Paris,  1874,  p.  170,  No.  3155).  Signor  Schiaparelli's  words  are: — 
"  Esso  ^  scritto  in  ieratico,  di  un  tipo  paleografico  speciale  :  I'enorme 
"  abbondanza  di  segni  espletivi,  la  frequenza  di  scgni  o  quasi  demotici 
"  o  quasi  geroglifici,  la  sottigliczza  di  tutti,  e  I'incertezza  con  cui  sono 
"  tracciati,  che  rivela  una  mano  pili  abituata  a  scrivere  in  greco  che  in 
"egiziano,  sono  altrettanti  caratteri  del  tipo  ieratico  del  ])eriodo  esclusiva- 
"  mente  romano,  a  cui  il  nostro  papiro  api)artiene  senza  alcun  dubbio.' 
II  Libro  dei  Funerali,  p.  19.  On  Dev^ria's  work  in  connection  with  this 
MS.,  see  Maspero,  Le  Rituel  du  sacrifice  Funeral  re  (in  Revue  de  VHistoire 
des  Religions,  t.  XV,  p.  161). 


Recensions  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead  3 

made  by  M.  Lacau  from  the  coffins  of  Al-Barshah,  and 
published  by  him  in  Reaceil  de  Travatix,  t.  26-27, 
28-33. 

II.  The  Theban  Recension,  which  was  commonly 
written  upon  papyri  and  painted  upon  coffins  in  hiero- 
glyphs and  was  divided  into  sections  or  chapters,  each 
of  which  had  its  distinct  title  but  no  definite  place  in 
the  series.  The  version  was  much  used  from  the  XV II Ith 
to  the  XXI I  nd  dynasty.  This  Recension  was  also  written 
upon  papyri  in  the  hieratic  character  and  in  hieroglyphs. 

III.  The  so-called  Saite  Recension,  in  which,  at 
some  period,  anterior  probably  to  the  XXV Ith  dynasty, 
the  chapters  were  arranged  in  a  definite  order.  It  is 
written  upon  coffins,  papyri,  etc.,  in  hieroglyphs,  and 
in  hieratic  and  in  demotic,  and  it  was  much  used  from 
the  XXV Ith  dynasty  to  the  end  of  the  Ptolemaic 
Period. 

The  title  of  Book  of  the  Dead  has  been  usually  given 
by  Egyptologists  to  the  Theban  and  Saite  Recensions,  but 
in  this  Introduction  the  term  is  intended  to  include  the 
general  body  of  religious  texts  which  deal  with  the  welfare 
of  the  dead  and  their  new  life  in  the  world  beyond  the 
grave,  and  which  are  known  to  have  existed  and  to  have 
been  in  use  among  the  Egyptians  from  about  4000  B.C.  to 
the  early  centuries  of  the  Christian  era. 

The  Pyramid  Texts  represent  the  oldest  form  of  the 
Book  of  the  Dead  known  to  us,  and  although  we  have  only 
copies  of  them  which  were  written  for  kings,  and  none 
which  were  written  for  priests,  officials,  and  private  gentle- 
men, it  is  not  right  to  conclude  from  this  fact  that  copies 
were  not  made  for  persons  other  than  kings  and  to  seek  to 
make  a  distinction  between  the  Heliopolitan  and  the  later 
Recensions  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead.  The  inastabah  tombs 
of  the  IVth  dynasty  prove  that  the  Liturgy  of  Funerary 
Offerings  and  the  Book  of  Opening  the  Mouth  were  recited 
for  the  benefit  of  ecclesiastical  and  civil  officials,  and  there 
is  no  reason  for  doubting  that  copies  of  sections  of  the 
Pyramid  Texts  were  made  for  their  benefit. 

The  earliest  tombs  found  in  Egypt  prove  that  the 
primitive  Egyptians  disposed  of  their  dead  partly  by 
burial,  and  partly  by  burning,  but  there  are   no  grounds 

B   2 


4  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

whatever  for  assuming-  that  all  the  dead  were  buried  and 
burned,  for  from  time  immemorial  it  has  always  been  the 
custom  in  Africa,  and  still  is  in  many  parts  of  that  con- 
tinent, to  allow  the  bodies  of  all  except  kings,  g-overnors, 
nobles,  and  men  of  high  rank,  to  be  devoured  by  wild 
animals,  or  to  be  consumed  by  the  myriads  of  flesh-destroying 
insects  which  infest  the  ground.  The  bodies  which  were 
buried  were  either  dismembered  or  buried  whole.  Bodies 
which  were  buried  in  graves  were  laid  on  their  left  sides 
with  their  heads  to  the  south,  and  they  were  sometimes 
wrapped  in  skins  of  animals,  or  reeds,  or  grass  mats. 
Bodies  were  cut  in  pieces  for  two  reasons,  to  save  space  in 
a  country  where  land  was  peculiarly  valuable,  and  to  prevent 
the  spirits  of  the  dead  from  returning  and  re-occupying 
their  old  bodies.  In  cases  where  fire  was  used  in  disposing 
of  the  dead,  the  bodies  were  only  partially  burnt,  and  the 
bones  were  collected  and  thrown  into  a  shallow  pit,  care 
being  taken  to  keep  the  head  and  the  hands  together.  At 
this  period  it  is  certain  that  offerings  were  made  to  the  dead, 
and  it  is  quite  clear  that  both  those  to  whom  the  offerings 
were  made,  and  those  who  made  them,  held  very  definite 
views  about  the  future  life  in  the  Other  World.  They  were 
quite  certain  that  men  did  not  perish  finally  when  they  died, 
and  that  some  part  of  a  man  departed  after  death  to  some 
place  where  he  would  renew  his  life  in  some  form,  according 
to  the  dictates  of  some  divine  beinof. 

O 

The  inhabitants  of  Egypt  who  disposed  of  their  dead 
by  burial  and  burning  could  not  write,  and  therefore  they 
could  not  have  possessed  any  collection  of  religious  texts 
which  could  be  regarded  as  the  foundations  of  the  Book  of 
the  Dead  now  known  to  us,  and  it  is  most  unlikely  that  they 
made  use  of  any  religious  formulae  when  they  buried  or 
burned  their  dead.  There  are  many  passages  in  the  Book  of 
the  Dead  containing  references  to  the  burial  customs  of  the 
primitive  Egyptians,  which  indicate  that  the  aborigines 
possessed  a  low  form  of  religious  belief  They  cannot, 
however,  in  any  way  be  regarded  as  the  founders  of  the 
Book  of  the  Dead,  because  that  work  presupposes  the 
existence  of  ideas  which  the  aborigines  did  not  possess,  and 
refers  to  an  elaborate  system  of  sepulture  which  they  never 
practised.  Whatever  views  may  be  held  as  to  the  origin 
of  the  Egyptians,  it  is  quite  certain  that  the  aborigines  of 


Influence  of  the  Cult  of  Osiris  5 

Egypt  employed  a  system  of  sepulture  which  was  quite 
different  from  that  which  was  in  use  amongr  their  latest 
predynastic  and  their  earliest  dynastic  descendants. 

From  what  has  been  said  above  it  is  clear  that  the 
earliest  inhabitants  of  Egypt  made  no  attempt  to  mummify 
their  dead  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  term.  Still,  as 
Dr.  Fouquet  has  found  traces  of  bitumen  in  some  predynastic 
skeletons,  we  may  assume  that  the  primitive  Egyptians 
would  have  taken  far  more  elaborate  precautions  to  preserve 
their  dead  had  they  possessed  the  necessary  knowledge. 
As  soon  as  the  Egyptians  began  to  mummify  their  dead, 
in  other  words,  to  preserve  the  body  in  a  complete  form, 
they  also  began  to  perform  funerary  ceremonies  of  a 
symbolic  nature,  and  to  recite  formulae  and  prayers  which 
were  believed  to  cause  great  benefit  to  the  dead.  The 
greatest  importance  was  attached  to  such  ceremonies  and 
formulae,  for  it  was  thought  that  they  would  endow  the 
dead  body  with  power  to  resist  corruption,  would  ensure 
it  a  renewed  and  beatified  existence  with  the  gods,  and 
would  preserve  it  for  ever.  The  great  change  which  took 
place  in  the  religious  views  of  the  Egyptians  a  little  before 
the  beginning  of  dynastic  history  was,  I  believe,  due  entirely 
to  the  rise  and  spread  of  the  cult  of  Osiris  throughout 
Egypt.  Whether  it  was  introduced  into  Egypt  by  a  people 
coming  from  the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean,  or  by  a 
Libyan  tribe,  or  by  "  proto-Semites  "  from  the  east  or 
south-east,  or  whether  it  was  of  purely  native  growth,  need 
not  concern  us  here.  What  is  all-important  to  note  is 
that  the  teachers  of  the  cult  of  Osiris  preached  that  the  dead 
body  of  a  man  was  a  sacred  thing,  and  that  it  was  not  to 
be  devoured  by  men  or  beasts,  or  burnt,  or  mutilated.  On 
the  contrary,  it  must,  if  the  wish  of  Osiris  was  to  be 
considered,  be  taken  the  greatest  care  of,  and  embalmed,  and 
buried  in  a  carefully  concealed  tomb.  But  why  .'*  The 
preservation  of  the  body  was  of  vital  importance,  because 
the  dogma  of  Osiris  taught  that  from  it  would  spring  the 
translucent,  transparent,  immaterial,  refulgent  and  glorious 
envelope  in  which  the  Spirit-soul  of  the  deceased  would 
take  up  its  abode  with  all  his  mental  and  spiritual  attributes. 

The  evidence  derived  from  the  enormous  mass  of  new 
material  which  we  owe  to  the  all-important  discoveries  of 
inastabah  tombs  and  pyramids  by  M.  Maspero,  and  to  his 


6  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

publication  of  the  early  religious  texts,  proves  beyond  all 
doubt  that  all  the  essential  texts  comprised  in  the  Book  of 
the  Dead  are,  in  one  form  or  another,  far  older  than  the 
period  of  Mena  (Menes),  the  first  historical  kino-  of  Egypt. ^ 
Certain  sections,  indeed,  appear  to  belong  to  the  Predynastic 
Period. 

The  earliest  texts  bear  within  themselves  proofs,  not 
only  of  having  been  composed,  but  also  of  having  been 
revised,  or  edited,  long  before  the  copies  known  to  us  were 
made,  and,  judging  from  many  passages  in  the  copies 
inscribed  in  hieroglyphs  upon  the  pyramids  of  Unas  (the 
last  king  of  the  Vth  dynasty,  about  3^33  i^c),  and  Teta, 
Pepi  I.,  Mehti-em-sa-f.  and  Pepi  II  (kings  of  the  Vlth 
dynasty,  about  3300-3166  B.C.),  it  would  seem  that,  even 
at  that  remote  date,  the  scribes  were  perplexed  and  hardly 
understood  the  texts  which  they  had  before  them.^  The 
most  moderate  estimate  makes  certain  sections  of  the  Book 

^  "  Les  textes  des  Pyramides nous  reportent  si  loin  dans  le 

*'  passe  que  je  n'ai  aucun  moyen  de  les  dater  que  de  dire  qu'elles  etaient 
"  deja  vieilles  cinq  mille  ans  avant  notre  ere.  Si  extraordinaire  que 
"  paraisse  ce  chiffre,  il  faudra  bien  nous  habituer  k  le  considerer  conime 
*'  repr^sentant  une  evaluation  a  minima  toutes  les  fois  qu'on  voudra 
"  rechercher  les  origines  de  la  religion  Lgyptienne.  La  religion  et  les 
"  textes  qui  nous  la  font  connaitre  etaient  dej^  constitues  avant  la  P* 
"  dynastie :  c'est  ^  nous  de  nous  mettre,  pour  les  comprendre,  dans  I'etat 
"  d'esprit  ou  etait,  il  y  a  plus  de  sept  mille  ans,  le  peuple  qui  les  a  constitues. 
"  Bien  entendu,  je  ne  parle  ici  que  des  syst^nies  theologiques  :  si  nous 
"  voulions  remonter  jusqu'a  I'origine  des  elements  qu'ils  ont  mis  en  oeuvre, 
"  il  nous  faudrait  reculer  vers  des  ages  encore  plus  lointains."  Maspero, 
La  Religion  Egyptienne  (in  Revue  de  PHistoire  des  Religions,  t.  XIX,  p.  12; 
and  in  Etudes  de  Mythologie  et  d'ArcMologie  Egyptiennes,  t.  II,  p.  236). 
Compare  also  "  dass  die  einzelnen  Texte  selbst  damals  schon  einer  alten 
"  heiligen  Litteratur  angehorten,  unterliegt  keinen  Zweifel,  sie  sind  in  jeder 
"  Hinsicht  alterthiimlicher  als  die  altestcn  uns  erhaltenen  Denkmaler.  Sie 
"  gehoren  in  cine  fiir  uns  '  vorhistorische '  Zeit  und  man  wird  ihnen  gewiss 
*'  kein  Unrecht  anthun,  wenn  man  sie  bis  in  das  vicrtc  Jahrtausend  hinein 
"  versetzt."  Erman,  Das  Verhiiltniss  des  aegyptischen  zu  den  semitischen 
Sprachen,  in  Z.D.M.G.,  Bd.  XLVI,  p.  94. 

-  "  Le  nombre  des  prieres  et  des  formules  dirigees  contre  les  animaux 
"  venimeux  montre  quel  effroi  le  serpent  et  le  scorpion  inspirait  aux 
"  Egyptiens.  Beaucoup  d'entre  elles  sont  ecrites  dans  une  langue  et  avec 
"  des  combinaisons  de  signes  qui  ne  paraissent  plus  avoir  (^te  complete- 
"  ment  comprises  des  scribes  qui  les  copiaient  sous  Ounas  et  sous  Pepi. 
"  Je  crois,  quant  h.  moi,  qu'elles  appartiennent  au  plus  vieux  rituel  et 
"  remontent  au  deK\  du  rl-gne  de  Mini."  Maspero,  La  Religion  Egyptienne 
{\n  Revue  de  I'Histoire  des  Religions,  i.  XII,  p.  125).  See  also  Recueil  de 
Travaux,  t.  IV,  p.  62. 


Antiquity  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead  7 

of  the  Dead  as  known  from  these  tombs  older  than  three 
thousand  years  before  Christ.  We  are  in  any  case  justified 
in  estimating-  the  earliest  form  of  the  work  to  be  contem- 
poraneous with  the  foundation  of  the  civilization^  which  we 
call  Egyptian  in  the  valley  of  the  Nile.^  To  fix  a  chrono- 
logical limit  for  the  arts  and  civilization  of  Egypt  is  absolutely 
impossible.^ 

The  oldest  form  or  edition  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead  as 
we  have  received  it  supplies  no  information  whatever  as  to 
the  period  when  it  was  compiled  ;  but  a  copy  of  the  hieratic 
text  inscribed  upon  a  coffin  of  Queen  Khnem-Nefert,  the 
wife  of  Menthu-hetep,  a  king  of  the  Xlth  dynasty,*  about 
2500  B.C.,  made  by  the  late  Sir  J.  G.  Wilkinson,^  informs  us 
that  the  Chapter  which,  according  to  the  arrangement  of 
Lepslus,  bears  the  number  LXIV,^  was  discovered  in  the 
reign  of  Hesep-ti,"^  the  fifth  king  of  the  1st  dynasty,  about 
4266  B.C.  On  this  coffin  are  two  copies  of  the  Chapter, 
the  one  immediately  following  the  other.  In  the  Rubric  to 
the  first  the  name  of  the  king  during  whose  reign  the 
Chapter  is  said  to  have  been  *'  found  "  is  given  as  Menthu- 
hetep,  which,  as  Goodwin  first  pointed  out,^  is  a  mistake 

1  "  So  sind  wir  gezwungen,  wenigstens  die  ersten  Grundlagen  des 
"  Buches  deii  Anfangen  der  Aegyptischen  Civilisation  beizuniessen."  See 
Naville,  Das  Aegyptische  Todtenbuch  (Einleitung),  Berlin,  1886,  p.  18. 

2  The  date  of  Mena  is  variously  given  as  5869  B.C.  (Champollion), 
5004  B.C.  (Mariette),  4455  B.C.  (Brugsch),  3893  B.C.  (Lieblein),  5510  B.C. 
(Petrie),  3892  B.C.  (Lepsius),  3623  B.C.  (Bunsen). 

^  See  Chabas,  Aeg.  Zeitschrift,  1865,  p.  95.  On  the  subject  of  the 
Antiquity  of  Egyptian  CiviHzation  generally,^  see  Chabas,  Etudes  sur 
VAntiquite  Historique  d'apres  les  Sources  Egyptiennes,  Paris,  1873 — 
Introduction,  p.  9,  and  see  especially  de  Morgan,  Recherches^  Paris,  1897; 
L'Age  de  la  pierre  et  les  Metaux,  Paris,  1896  ;  Les  Premieres  Civilisations, 
Paris,  1909. 

*  The  name  of  the  queen  and  her  titles  are  given  thus  : — 


^  It  was  presented  to  the  British  Museum  in  1834,  and  is  now  in  the 
Department  of  Egyptian  and  Assyrian  Antiquities.  A  facsimile  of  this  copy 
is  published  by  Budge,  Egyptia^i  Hieratic  Papyri,  London,  1910. 

6  Todtenbuch,  Bl.  23-25. 

"*    =f5^  (  L '  \\  )  the  OvffacjiaU  v'lo's   of  Manetho.     The  name   is  now 

generally  read  Semti. 

^  Aeg.  Zeitschrift,  1866,  p.  54. 


8  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

for  Men-kau-Ra/  the  fourth  king  of  the  IVth  dynasty, 
about  3633  B.C.  ;^  but  in  the  Rubric  to  the  second  the 
king's  name  is  given  as  Hesep-ti.  Thus  it  appears  that  in 
the  period  of  the  Xlth  dynasty  it  was  beheved  that  the 
Chapter  might  ahernatively  be  as  old  as  the  time  of  the 
1st  dynasty.  Further,  it  is  given  to  Hesep-ti  in  papyri  of 
the  XX I  St  dynasty,^  a  period  when  particular  attention  was 
paid  to  the  history  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead  ;  and  it  thus 
appears  that  the  Egyptians  of  the  New  Empire  believed 
the  Chapter  to  date  from  the  more  remote  period.  To 
quote  the  words  of  Chabas,  the  Chapter  was  regarded  as 
being  "  very  ancient,  very  mysterious,  and  very  difficult  to 
understand  "  already  fourteen  centuries  before  our  era.* 

The  Rubric  on  the  coffin  of  Queen  Khnem-Nefert, 
which  ascribes  the  Chapter  to  Hesep-ti,  states  that  "  this 
"  Chapter  was  found  in  the  foundations  beneath  the 
"  Dweller  in  the  Hen^iti  Boat  by  the  foreman  of  the  builders 
"  in  the  time  of  the  king  of  the  South  and  North,  Hesep-ti, 
"  whose  word  is  truth  "  ;^  the  Nebseni  Papyrus  says  that 
"  this  Chapter  was  found  in  the  city  of  Khemenu 
''  (Hermopolis)  on  a  block  of  alabaster  written  in  letters  of 

^  See  Guieyesse,  Rituel  Ftmiraire  Agyptien,  chapitre  64^,  Paris,  1876, 
p.  10,  note  2. 

^  The  late  recension  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead  pubhshed  by  Lepsius 

also   gives   the   king's    name    as    Men-kau-Ra  (  O  ttli^  LJ  1   {Todienbuch, 

Bl.  25,  1.  31).     In  the  same  recension  the  CXXXth  Chapter  is  ascribed  to 

the  reign    of  Hesep-ti   [!— I— 1''^ '1   (Bl.  53,  1.   28).         See  also  Budge, 

The  Chapters  of  Comitig  Forth  by  -Day,  Chapter  LXIV. 

*  Naville,  Todtenbiich  (Einleitung),  pp.  33,  139. 

*  Chabas,  Voyage  d'un  Egypticn,  p.  46.  According  to  M.  Naville 
(Einleitung,  p.  138),  who  follows  Chabas's  opinion,  this  Chapter  is  an 
abridgment  of  the  whole  Book  of  the  Dead ;  and  it  had,  even  though  it 
contained  not  all  the  religious  doctrine  of  the  Egyptians,  a  value  which  was 
equivalent  to  the  whole. 

1  y^s  (  L'\\  I-      See    Goodwin,    Aeg.    Zeitschrijt,    1866,    p.    55, 


/W\A/NA 

o 

and  compare  the  reading  from  the  Cairo  Papyrus  of  Mes-em-neter  given  by 
Naville  i^Todtenbuch,  II,  p.  139). 


Herutataf,  the  Son  of  King  Khufu  9 

"  lapis-lazuli,  under  the  feet  of  the  god"  ;^  and  the  Turin 
Papyrus  (XXV I th  dynasty  or  later)  adds  that  the  name  of 

the  finder  was  Heru-ta-ta-f,  Vk  iziS  "^-^^  ^ '  ^^^  ^°"  '^^ 
Khufu  or  Cheops,^  the  second  king  of  the  IVth  dynasty, 
about  37SS  B.C.,  who  was  at  the  time  making  a  tour  of 
inspection  of  the  temples.  Birch^  and  Naville^  consider 
the  Chapter  one  of  the  oldest  in  the  Book  of  the  Dead  ; 
the  former  basing  his  opinion  on  the  Rubric,  and  the  latter 
upon  the  evidence  derived  from  the  contents  and  character 
of  the  text  :  but  Maspero,  while  admitting  the  great  age  of 
the  Chapter,  does  not  attach  any  very  great  importance  to 
the  Rubric  as  fixing  any  exact   date   for   its  composition.^ 

^  See  Budge,  T/ie  Chapters  of  Comitig  Forth  by  Bay,  Chapter  LXIV. 
-  Lepsius,  Todtenbuch,  Bl.  25,  1.  31. 

3  The  most  remarkable  Chapter is  the  64th It  is  one 

"  of  the  oldest  of  all,  and  is  attributed,  as  already  stated,  to  the  epoch  of 

"  King  Gaga-Makheru   [  !— I— j  ^^  1 ,    or    Menkheres This 

"  Chapter  enjoyed  a  high  reputation  till  a  late  period,  for  it  is  found  on 
"  a  stone  presented  to  General  Peroffsky  by  the  late  Emperor  Nicholas, 
"  which     must     have     come    from    the    tomb     of    Petemenophis,*     in 

"  El-Assasif,t   and  was  made  during  the  XXVIth  dynasty 

"  vSome  more  recent  compiler  of  the  Hermetic  books  has  evidently  para- 
"  phrased  it  for  the  Ritual  of  Turin."  Bunsen,  Egypt's  Place  in  Universal 
History,  London,  1867,  p.  142.  The  block  of  stone  to  which  Dr.  Birch 
refers  is  described  by  Golenischeff,  Emiitage  Imperial,  Inventaire  de  la 
Collection  E gyp  tie  nne.  No.  iioi,pp.  169,  170.  There  is  an  electrotype  of 
this  stone  in  the  British  Museum  (No.  29553).  I  have  published  a  copy 
of  the  texts  on  it  (Chapters  XXVI,  XXXb,  and  LXIV)  in  my  Chapters  of 
Corning  Forth  by  Day,  Vol.  Ill,  pp.  241  ff,,  London,  1910.  M.  Maspero 
thinks  it  was  meant  to  be  a  "  pretendu  fac-simile  "  of  the  original  slab, 
which,  according  to  the  Rubric,  was  found  in  the  temple  of  Thoth,  Revue  de 
V Historic  des  Religions,  t.  xv,  p.  299,  and  Etudes  de  Mythologie,  t.  I,  p.  368. 

^  Todte?ibuch  (Einleitung),  p.  139.  Sir  P.  Renouf  also  held  this  opinion, 
Trans.  Soc.  Bibl.  Arch.,  1893,  p.  6. 

^  "  On  explique  d'ordinaire  cette  indication  comme  une  marque 
"  d'antiquite  extreme ;  on  part  de  ce  principe  que  le  Livre  des  Morts  est  de 
"  composition  relativement  moderne,  et  qu'un  scribe  egyptien,  nommant 
"  un  roi  des  premieres  dynasties  memphites,  ne  pouvait  entendre  par  la 
*'  qu'un  personnage  d'epoque  tres  reculee.  Cette  explication  ne  me  parait 
"  pas  etre  exacte.     En  premier  lieu,  le  chapitre  LXIV  se  trouve  deja  sur 

*  '^•^■'  A  ^  n  \  '  '/2  '  ^^  "chief  reader,"  many  of  the  inscriptions  on  whose 
tomb  have  been  published  by  Dlimichen,  Der  Grabpalast  des  Patuamenap ;  Leipzig, 
1884,  1885. 

t  I.e.,  Asasif  al-Bahrtyah,  or  Asasif  of  the  North,  behind  Der  al-Bahari,  on  the  western 
bank  of  the  Nile,  opposite  Thebes. 


lo  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

Of  Herutataf,  the  finder  of  the  block  of  stone,  we  know 
from  later  texts  that  he  was  considered  to  be  a  learned  man, 
and  that  his  speech  was  only  with  difficulty  to  be  under- 
stood,^ and  we  also  know  the  prominent  part  which  he  took 
as  a  recognized  man  of  letters  in  bringing  to  the  Court  of 
his  father  Khufu  the  Sage  Teta.^  It  is  then  not  improbable 
that  Herutatafs  character  for  learninof  may  have  sugro-ested 
the  connection  of  his  name  with  the  Chapter,  possibly 
as  its  literary  reviser  ;  at  all  events  as  early  as  the  period 
of  the  Middle  Empire,  tradition  associated  him  with  it. 

Passing  from  the  region  of  native  Egyptian  tradition, 
we  touch  firm  ground  with  the  evidence  derived  from  the 

"  des  monuments  contemporains  de  la  X*^  et  de  la  XP  dynastie,  et  n'etait 
''  certainement  pas  nouveau  au  moment  ou  on  ecrivait  les  copies  les  plus 
"  vieilles  que  nous  en  ayons  aujourd'hui.  Lorsqu'on  le  redigea  sous  sa 
'■  forme  actuelle,  le  regne  de  Mykerinos,  et  meme  celui  d'Housapaiti, 
"  ne  devaient  pas  soulever  dans  I'esprit  des  indigenes  la  sensation  de 
"  Tarchaismt;  et  du  primitif:  on  avait  pour  rendre  ces  idees  des  expressions 
"  plus  fortes,  qui  renvoyaient  le  lecteur  au  siecles  des  Sennteurs  d'Horus,  a 
"  la  domination  de  Ra,  aux  ages  ou  les  dieux  regnaient  sur  I'Egypte." 
Revue  de  VHistoire  des  Religions,  t.  XV,  p.  299. 

^  Chabas,  Voyage,  ■\^.  46;  Wiedemann,  Aegyptische  Geschichte,  p.  191. 
In  the  Brit.  Mus.  Papyrus  No.  10060  (Harris  500),  Herutataf  is  mentioned 
together  with  I-em-hetep  as  a  well-known  author,  and  the  writer  of  the 
dirge  says  :  "  I  have  heard  the  words  of  I-em-hetej)  and  of  Herutataf, 
"  whose  many  and  varied  writings  are  said  and  sung  ;  but  now  where  are 
"  their  places  ? "  The  hieratic  text  is  published  with  a  hieroglyphic 
transcript  by  Maspero  in  Journal  Asia tique,  S^r.  VH''"",  t.  XV,  p.  404  ff., 
and  Etudes  Egvpdennes,  t.  I,  p.  173;  for  English  translations,  see  Trans. 
Soc.  Bibl.  Arch.,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  386,  and  Records  of  the  Past,  ist  ed.,  Vol.  IV, 
p.  117. 

2  According  to  the  Westcar  Papyrus,  Herutataf  informed  his  father 
Khufu  of  the  existence  of  a  man  no  years  old  who  lived  in  the  town  of 
Tet-Seneferu  :  he  was  able  to  join  to  its  body  again  a  head  that  had  been 
cut  off,  and  possessed  influence  over  the  lion,  and  was  acquainted  with  the 
mysteries  of  Thoth.  I'y  Khufu's  command  Herutataf  brought  the  sage  to 
him  by  boat,  and,  on  his  arrival,  the  king  ordered  the  head  to  be  struck  off 
from  a  prisoner  that  Teta  might  fasten  it  on  again.  Having  excused 
himself  from  performing  this  act  upon  a  man,  a  goose  was  brought  and  its 
head  was  cut  off  and  laid  on  one  side  of  the  room  and  the  body  was  placed 

on  the  other.    The  sage  spake  certain  words  of  power  (  Q  j    j  ^^.   ^  1  ] , 

whereupon  the  goose  stood  up  and  began  to  waddle,  and  the  head  also 
began  to  move  towards  it;  when  the  head  had  joined  itself  again  to  the 

body  the  bird  stood  up  and  cackled  S  ^:>  S  ^^   Qf  •    For  ^^e  complete 

hieratic  text,  transcript,  and  translation,  see  Erman,  Die  Miirchcn  des 
Papyrus  J  Fes  tear,  Berlin,  1890,  p.  11,  Plate  6. 


Book  of  the  Dead  in  the  Ilnd  Dynasty        ii 

monuments  of  the  Ilnd  dynasty.  A  bas-relief  preserved  at 
Aix  in  Provence  mentions  Aasen  and  Ankef,^  two  of  the 

priests  of  Sent  or  Senta  4=\^  Ml  ^^  [)  J,  the   fifth  king  of 

the  Ilnd  dynasty,  about  4000  B.C.  ;  and  a  stele  at  Oxford^ 
and  another  in  the  Egyptian  Museum  at  Gizah  ^  record  the 

name  of  a  third  priest,   Shera  (l'^  or  Sheri  [In,  a 

"royal    relative"    i_      .     On    the    stele    at     Oxford    are 

represented  the  deceased  and  his  wife  seated,  one  on  each 

side  of  an  altar  Ifl',^  which  is  covered  with  funerary  offerings 

of  pious  relatives  ;  above,  in  perpendicular  lines  of  hiero- 
glyphs in  relief,  are  the  names  of  the  objects  offered,''  and 
below  is  an  inscription  which  reads  :'^  "  thousands  of  loaves 
"  of  bread,  thousands  of  vases  of  ale,  thousands  of  linen 
"  garments,  thousands  of  changes  of  wearing  apparel,  and 
"  thousands  of  oxen."^  Now  from  this  monument  it  is 
evident  that  already  in  the  Ilnd  dynasty  a  priesthood 
existed    in    Egypt   which    numbered    among    its    members 


^  Wiedemann,  Aegyptische  Geschichte,  p.  1 70.     In  a  mastabah  at  Sakkarah 
e  a  stele  of  Sheri  U  (J  >  ^  superintendent  of  the  priests  of  the  ka 

—-^  \    1  III'   whereon    the    cartouches    of    Sent   and   Per-ab-sen 


(  .^-^  O  I  /wwv\  I  both  occur.    See  Mariette  and  Maspero,  Les  Mastaba  de 

raficien  Empire,  Paris,  1882,  p.  92. 

■■^  See  Lepsius,  Auszvahl,  Bl.  9. 

^  See  Maspero,  Guide  du  Visiteur  au  Musee  de  Bouhiq,  1883,  pp.  31, 
32,  and  213  (No.  1027). 

*  There  is  also  a  slab  from  Shera's  tomb  in  the  British  Museum.  See 
Guide  to  the  Egyptian  Galleries,  p.  i,  No.  i. 

•5  A  discussion  on  the  method  of  depicting  this  altar  on  Egyptian 
monuments  by  Borchardt  may  be  found  in  Aeg.  Zeitschri/t,  Bd.  XXXI, 
p.  I  {Die  Darstellung  innen  verzierter  Schalen  anf  aeg.  Denkmdlern). 

«  Among  others,  (i)'jl|Jo°,  (2)(j™:,  (3)()'^#,  (4)  .--.fn^; 

the  word  incense  is  written  twice,    1    |  ^  .     Some  of  these  appear  in 

the  lists  of  offerings  made  for  Unas  (1.  147)  and  for  Teta  (11.  125,  131,  133  ; 
see  Reaieil  de  Travaux,  1884,  Plate  2). 


|\lolslM3 


The  sculptor  had  no  room  for  the  T  belonging  to  £j . 


12  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

relatives  of  the  royal  family,  and  that  a  religious  system 
which  prescribed  as  a  duty  the  providing  of  meat  and  drink 
offerings  for  the  dead  was  also  in  active  operation.  The 
offering  of  specific  objects  goes  far  to  prove  the  existence 
of  a  ritual  or  service  wherein  their  siijnification  would  be 
indicated  ;  the  coincidence  of  these  words  and  the  prayer 
for  "  thousands  of  loaves  of  bread,  thousands  of  vases  of 
ale,"  etc.,  with  the  promise,  "  Anpu-khent-Amenta  shall  give 
"  thee  thy  thousands  of  loaves  of  bread,  thy  thousands  of 
"  vases  of  ale,  thy  thousands  of  vessels  of  unguents,  thy 
"  thousands  of  changes  of  apparel,  thy  thousands  of  oxen, 
"and  thy  thousands  of  bullocks,"  enables  us  to  recognise 
that  ritual  in  the  text  inscribed  upon  the  pyramid  of  Teta 
in  the  Vlth  dynasty,  from  which  the  above  promise  is  taken. ^ 
Thus  the  evidence  of  the  text  on  the  coffin  of  the  wife  of 
Menthu-hetep  and  the  scene  on  the  monument  of  Shera 
support  one  another,  and  together  they  prove  beyond  a 
doubt  that  a  form  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead  was  in  use  at 
least  in  the  period  of  the  earliest  dynasties,  and  that  sepul- 
chral ceremonies  connected  therewith  were  duly  performed.^ 

^Min"=^k^^^'  Teta,  II.  3S8,  389.  (^«»«/. 
ed.  Maspero,  t.  V,  p.  58.) 

-  The  arguments  brought  forward  here  in  proof  of  the  great  antiquity  of 
a  religious  system  in  Egypt  are  supplemented  in  a  remarkable  manner  by 

the  inscriptions  found   in  the   mastabah  of  Seker-khfi-baiu   ' — ^  Q  '^m 

at  Sakkarah.  Here  we  have  a  man  who,  like  Shera,  was  a  "royal  relative  " 
and  a  priest,  but  who,  unlike  him,  exercised  some  of  the  highest  functions 

of  the  Egyptian  priesthood  in  virtue  of  his  title  \\\  Xf^  hem.  (On  the 
^~*  ^  ^     see  Max  Miiller,  Recueil  de  Travaux,  t.  IX,  p.  166;    Brugsch, 


Ae}^piologie,  ]).  21S  ;  and  Maspero,  Un  Manuel  de  Hierarchie  Eg)'ptienne, 
p.   9.)      Among   the  offerings   named    in    the   tomb   arc   the    substances 

AAAWN    J     I,  0  v\  ,^=v  and  (1  which  are  also  mentioned  on  the  stele  of 

Shera  of  the  Ilnd  dynasty,  and  in  the  texts  of  the  Vlth  dynasty.     But  the 
tomb  of  Seker-kha-baiu  is  different  from  any  other  known  to  us,  both  as 

*  Ptah-shepses  bore  this  title  ;  see  Mariette  and  Maspero,  Les  Mastaba,  p.  113. 


Book  of  the  Dead  in  the  IVth  Dynasty        13 

With  the  IVth  dynasty  we  have  an  increased  number 
of  monuments,  chiefly  sepulchral,  which  give  details  as  to 
the  Egyptian  sacerdotal  system  and  the  funeral  ceremonies 
which  the  priests  performed.^  The  inscriptions  upon  the 
earlier  monuments  prove  that  many  of  the  priestly  officials 
were  still  relatives  of  the  royal  family,  and  the  tombs  of 
feudal  lords,  scribes,  and  others,  record  a  number  of  their 
official  titles,  together  with  the  names  of  several  of  their 
religious  festivals.  The  subsequent  increase  in  the  number 
of  the  monuments  during  this  period  may  be  due  to  the 
natural  development  of  the  religion  of  the  time,  but  it  is 
very  probable  that  the  greater  security  of  life  and  property 
which  had  been  assured  by  the  vigorous  wars  of  Seneferu,^ 
the  first  king  of  this  dynasty,  about  3766  B.C.,  encouraged 
men  to  incur  greater  expense,  and  to  build  larger  and  better 
abodes  for  the  dead,  and  to  celebrate  the  full  ritual  at  the 
prescribed  festivals.  In  this  dynasty  the  royal  dead  were 
honoured  with  sepulchral  monuments  of  a  greater  size  and 

regards  the  form  and  cutting  of  the  hieroglyphs,  which  are  in  relief,  and 
the  way  in  which  they  are  disposed  and  grouped.  The  style  of  the  whole 
monument  is  rude  and  very  primitive,  and  it  cannot  be  attributed  to  any 
dynasty  later  than  the  Ilnd,  or  even  to  the  Ilnd  itself;  it  must,  there- 
fore, have  been  built  during  the  1st  dynasty,  or  in  the  words  of  MM. 
Mariette  and  Maspero,  '•  L'impression  generale  que  Ton  regoit  au  premier 
"  aspect  du  tombeau  No.  5,  est  celle  d'une  extreme  antiquite.  Rien  en 
"  effet  de  ce  que  nous  sommes  habitues  a  voir  dans  les  autres  tombeaux  ne 
"  se  retrouve  ici  .  .  .  Le  monument  ....  est  certainement  le  plus  ancien 
"  de  ceux  que  nous  connaissons  dans  la  plaine  de  Saqqarah,  et  il  n'y  a  pas 
"  de  raison  pour  qu'il  ne  soit  pas  de  la-  I""^  Dynastie."  Les  Mastaba  de 
V ancien  Empire :  Paris,  1882,  p.  73.  But  because  there  is  no  incontrovertible 
proof  that  this  tomb  belongs  to  the  1st  dynasty,  the  texts  on  the  stele  of 
Shera,  a  monument  of  a  later  dynasty,  have  been  adduced  as  the  oldest 
evidences  of  the  antiquity  of  a  fixed  religious  system  and  literature  in 
Egypt. 

1  Many  of  the  monuments  commonly  attributed  to  this  dynasty  should 
more  correctly  be  described  as  being  the  work  of  the  Ilnd  dynasty  ;  see 
Maspero,  Geschichtc  der  Morgenldndischen  Volker  im  Alterthutn  (trans. 
Pietschmann),  Leipzig,   1877,  p.  56  ;    Wiedemann,  Aegyptische  Geschichte, 

P-  170- 

-  He  conquered  the  peoples  in  the  -Sinaitic  Peninsula,  and  according  to 
a  text  of  a  later  date  he  built  a  wall  to  keep  out  the  Aamu  from  Ec;ypt.     In 


the  story  of  Saneha  a  ''pool  of  Seneferu  "  |     '  J  "iS^   P^  mentioned, 

which  shows  that  his  name  was  well  known  on  the  frontiers  of  Egypt.  See 
Golenischeff,  Aeg.  Zeitschri/t,  p.  no;  Maspero,  Melanges  d'Archeologie, 
t.  Ill,  Paris,  1876,  p.  71,  1.  2;  Lepsius,  Denkmdler,  II,  2a. 


14  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

magnificence  than  had  ever  before  been  contemplated,  and 
the  chapels  attached  to  the  pyramids  were  served  by  courses 
of  priests  whose  sole  duties  consisted  in  celebrating  the 
services.  The  fashion  of  building  a  pyramid  instead  of  the 
rectangular  flat-roofed  rnastabali  for  a  royal  tomb  was 
revived  by  Seneferu,^  who  called  his  pyramid  Kha  ;  and 
his  example  was  followed  by  his  immediate  successors, 
Khufu  (Cheops),  Khaf-Ra  (Chephren),  Men-kau-Ra  (My- 
cerinus),  and  others. 

In  the  reign  of  Mycerinus  some  important  work  seems 
to  have  been  undertaken  in  connection  with  certain  sections 
of  the  text  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead,  for  the  Rubrics  of 
Chapters  XXXb  and  CXLVIII^  state  that  these  composi- 
tions were  found  inscribed  upon  "a  block  of  alabaster  of 
"  the  south  in  letters  of  real  lapis-lazuli  under  the  feet  of 
"  the  majesty  of  the  god  in  the  time  of  the  King  of  the 
"  South  and  North  Men-kau-Ra,  by  the  royal  son  Heru- 
"  tataf,  whose  word  is  truth."  That  a  new  impulse  should 
be  "iven  to  religious  observances,  and  that  the  revision 
of  existing  religious  texts  should  take  place  in  the  reign  of 
Mycerinus,  was  only  to  be  expected  if  Greek  tradition  may 
be  believed,  for  both  Herodotus  and  Diodorus  Siculus 
represent  him  as  a  just  king,  and  one  who  was  anxious  to 
efface  from  the  minds  of  the  people  the  memory  of  the 
alleged  cruelty  of  his  predecessor  by  re-opening  the  temples 
and  by  letting  every  man  celebrate  his  own  sacrifices  and 
discharge  his  own  religious  duties.^  His  pyramid  is  the 
one  now  known  as  the  "  third  pyramid  of  Gizah,"  under 
which  he  was  buried  in  a  chamber  vertically  below  the 
apex  and  sixty  feet  below  the  level  of  the  ground.  Whether 
the  pyramid  was  finished  or  not'*  when  the  king  died,  his 
body  was  certainly  laid  in  it,  and  notwithstanding  all  the 
attempts  made  by  the  Muhammadan  rulers  of  Egypt ^  to 

1  The  building  of  the  pyramid  of  MedClm  has  usually  been  attributed  to 
Seneferu,  but  the  excavations  made  there  in  1882  did  nothing  to  clear  up 
the  uncertainty  which  exists  on  this  point ;  for  recent  excavations  see  Petrie, 
Medum,  London,  1892,  4to. 

2  For  the  text  see  my  Chapters  of  Coming  Forth  by  Day.      2nd   ed. 
8  Herodotus,  II,  129,  i  ;  Diodorus,  I,  64,  9, 

*  According  to  Diodorus,  he  died  before  it  was  comjjleted  (I,  64,  7). 

''  According  to  'Abd  al-Latif  the  Khalif's  name  was  Mamun,  but  M.  de 
Sacy  doubted  that  he  was  the  first  to  attempt  this  work  ;  the  authorities  on 
the  subject  are  all  given  in  his  Relation  de  i' Egypte,  Paris,  iSio,  pp.  215-221. 


The  Coffin  of  Mycerinus  15 

destroy  it  at  the  end  of  the  twelfth  century  of  our  era,  it 
has  survived  to  yield  up  important  facts  for  the  history  of 
the  Book  of  the  Dead. 

In  1837  Colonel  Howard  Vyse  succeeded  in  forcing 
the  entrance.  On  the  29th  of  July  he  commenced  opera- 
tions, and  on  the  ist  of  August  he  made  his  way  into  the 
sepulchral  chamber,  where,  however,  nothing  was  found 
but  a  rectangular  stone  sarcophagus^  without  the  lid.  The 
large  stone  slabs  of  the  floor  and  the  linings  of  the  wall 
had  been  in  many  instances  removed  by  thieves  in  search 
of  treasure.  In  a  lower  chamber,  connected  by  a  passage 
with  the  sepulchral  chamber,  was  found  the  greater  part  of 
the  lid  of  the  sarcophagus,-  together  with  portions  of  a 
wooden  coffin,  and  part  of  the  body  of  a  man,  consisting  of 
ribs   and   vertebrae  and   the   bones   of  the   legs   and    feet. 

Tradition,  as  represented  in  the  "  Arabian  Nights,"  says  that  Al-Mamun 
was  minded  to  pull  down  the  pyramids,  and  that  he  expended  a  mint  of 
money  in  the  attempt ;  he  succeeded,  however,  only  in  opening  up  a  small 
tunnel  in  one  of  them,  wherein  it  is  said  he  found  treasure  to  the  exact 
amount  of  the  moneys  which  he  had  spent  in  the  work,  and  neither  more 
nor  less.  The  Arabic  writer  Idrisi,  who  wrote  about  a.h.  623  (a.d.  1226), 
states  that  a  few  years  ago  the  "  Red  Pyramid,"  i.e.,  that  of  Mycerinus,  was 
opened  on  the  north  side.  After  passing  through  various  passages  a  room 
was  reached  wherein  was  found  a  long  blue  vessel,  quite  empty.  The 
opening  into  this  pyramid  was  effected  by  people  in  search  of  treasure ; 
they  worked  at  it  with  axes  for  six  months,  and  they  in  great  numbers. 
They  found  in  this  basin,  after  they  had  broken  the  covering  of  it,  the 
decayed  remains  of  a  man,  but  no  treasure,  excepting  some  golden  tablets 
inscribed  with  characters  of  a  language  which  nobody  could  understand. 
Each  man's  share  of  these  tablets  amounted  to  100  dinars  (about  ^50). 
Other  legendary  history  says  that  the  western  pyramid  contains  thirty 
chambers  of  parti-coloured  syenite  full  of  precious  gems  and  costly  weapons 
anointed  with  unguents  that  they  may  not  rust  until  the  day  of  the 
Resurrection.  See  Howard  Vyse,  The  Pyramids  of  Gizeh,  Vol.  II,  pp.  71,. 
72;  and  Burton,  The  Book  of  the  Thousafid  Nights  and  a  Night,  1885, 
Vol.  V,  p.  105,  and  Vol.  X,  p.  150. 

^  Vyse,  The  Pyramids  of  Gizeh,  Vol.  II,  p.  84.  A  fragment  of  this 
sarcophagus  is  exhibited  in  the  British  Museum,  First  Egyptian  Room, 
Case  B,  No.  6646. 

2  With  considerable  difficulty  this  interesting  monument  was  brought 
out  from  the  pyramid  by  Mr.  Raven,  and  having  been  cased  in  strong 
timbers,  was  sent  off  to  the  British  Museum.  It  was  embarked  at  Alexandria 
in  the  autumn  of  1838,  on  board  a  merchant  ship,  which  was  supposed  to 
have  been  lost  off  Carthagena,  as  she  never  was  heard  of  after  her  departure 
from  Leghorn  on  the  12th  of  October  in  that  year,  and  as  some  parts  of 
the  wreck  were  picked  up  near  the  former  port.  The  sarcophagus  is 
figured  by  Vyse,  Pyramids,  Vol.  II,  Plate  facing  p.  84. 


1 6  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

enveloped  in  a  coarse  woollen  cloth  of  a  yellow  colour,  to 
which  a  small  quantity  of  resinous  substance  and  gum 
adhered.^  It  would  therefore  seem  that,  as  the  sarcophagus 
could  not  be  removed,  the  wooden  case  alone  containing 
the  body  had  been  brought  into  the  large  apartment  for 
examination.  Now,  whether  the  human  remains-  there 
found  are  those  of  Mycerinus  or  of  some  one  else,  as  some 
have  suggested,  in  no  way  affects  the  question  of  the 
ownership  of  the  coffin,  for  we  know  by  the  hieroglyphic 
inscription  upon  it  that  it  was  made  to  hold  the  mummified 
body  of  the  king.  This  inscription,  which  is  arranged  in 
two  perpendicular  lines  down  the  front  of  the  coffin,  reads  : — 


[Hail]  Osiris,  {^""5,6^??"'^}     Men-kau-Ra,  living  forever,  born     of 

heaven,    conceived  of    Nut,        heir  of  Keb,  his  beloved. 

D 
rvn 
Spreadeth  herself    thy  mother  Nut    over  thee        in      her  name     of 

^  As  considerable  misapprehension  about  the  finding  of  these  remains 
has  existed,  the  account  of  the  circumstances  under  which  they  were 
discovered  will  be  of  interest.  "Sir,  by  your  request,  I  send  you  the 
"  particulars  of  the  finding  of  the  bones,  mummy-cloth,  and  parts  of  the 
"  coffin  in  the  Third  Pyramid.  In  clearing  the  rubbish  out  of  the  large 
"  entrance-room,  after  the  men  had  been  employed  there  several  days  and 
"  had  advanced  some  distance  towards  the  South-eastern  corner,  some 
*'  bones  were  first  discovered  at  the  bottom  of  the  rubbish ;  and  the 
"  remaining  bones  and  parts  of  the  coffin  were  immediately  discovered  all 
"  together.  No  other  ])arts  of  the  coffin  or  bones  could  be  found  in  the 
"  room  ;  I  therefore  had  the  rubbish  which  had  been  previously  turned  out 
"  of  the  same  room  carefully  re-e.xamined,  when  several  pieces  of  the  coffin 
"  and  of  the  mummy-cloth  were  found  ;  but  in  no  other  part  of  the  pyramid 
"  were  any  parts  of  it  to  be  discovered,  although  every  place  was  most 
"  minutely  examined,  to  make  the  coffin  as  com])lete  as  possible.  There 
"  was  about  three  feet  of  rubbish  on  the  top  of  the  same  :  and  from  the 
"  circumstance  of  the  bones  and  part  of  the  coffin  being  all  found  together, 
"  It  appeared  as  if  the  coffin  had  been  brought  to  that  spot  and  there 
"  unpacked. — H.  Raven."     Vyse,  Pyramids,  Vol.  II,  p.  86. 

2  They  are  exhibited  in  the  First  Egyptian  Room,  Case  B,  with  the 
fragments  of  the  coffin. 


The  Coffin  of  Mycerinus  17 


"  mystery  of  heaven,"  she  granteth    that  thou  mayest  exist    as     a  god  to 

thy  foes,        {  O  ''tVNonh!"'^' }     Men-kau-Ra,  living  for  ever  ! 

Now  it  is  to  be  noted  that  the  passage  "  Thy  mother 
"  Nut  spreadeth  herself  over  thee  in  her  name  of  '  Mystery 
"of  Heaven,'  she  granteth  that  thou  mayest  be  without 
"  enemies,"  occurs  in  the  texts  which  are  inscribed  upon 
the  pyramids  built  by  the  kings  of  the  Vlth  dynasty,^  and 
thus  we  have  evidence  of  the  use  of  the  same  version  of 
one  reHo-ious  text  both  in  the  IVth  and  in  the  Vlth 
dynasties.^ 

Even  if  we  were  to  admit  that  the  coffin  is  a  forgery 
of  the  XXV I  th  dynasty,  and  that  the  inscription  upon  it 
was  taken  from  an  edition  of  the  text  of  the  Book  of  the 
Dead,  still  the  value  of  the  monument  as  an  evidence  of 
the  antiquity  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead  is  scarcely  impaired, 

^  See  the  texts  of  Teta  and  Pepi  I,  in  Maspero,  Reciieil  de  Travaux, 
t.  V,  pp.  20,  38  (11.  175,  279),  and  pp.  165,  173  (11.  60,  103),  etc. 

^  So  far  back  as  1883,  M.  Maspero,  in  lamenting  {Gtiide  du  Visiteur  de 
Boulai/,  p.  310)  the  fact  that  the  BCilaq  Museum  possessed  only  portions 
of  wooden  coffins  of  the  Ancient  Empire  and  no  complete  example,  noticed 
that  the  coffin  of  Mycerinus,  preserved  in  the  British  Museum,  had  been 
declared  by  certain  Egyptologists  to  be  a  "  restoration  "  of  the  XXVIth 
dynasty,  rather  than  the  work  of  the  IVth  dynasty,  in  accordance  with  the 
inscription  upon  it  ;  but  like  Dr.  Birch  he  was  of  opinion  that  the  coffin 
certainly  belonged  to  the  IVth  dynasty,  and  adduced  in  support  of  his 
views  the  fact  of  the  existence  of  portions  of  a  similar  coffin  of  Seker-em- 
sa-f,  a  king  of  the  Vlth  dynasty.  Later,  however,  another  attempt  was 
made  {Aeg.  Zeitschrifi,  Bd.  XXX,  pp.  94  ff )  to  prove  by  the  agreement 
of  the  variants  in  the  text  on  the  coffin  of  Mycerinus  with  those  of  texts  of 
the  XXVIth  dynasty,  that  the  Mycerinus  text  is  of  this  late  period,  or  at  all 
events  not  earlier  than  the  time  of  Psammetichus.  But  it  is  admitted  on 
all  hands  that  in  the  XXVIth  dynasty  the  Egyptians  resuscitated  texts  of  the 
first  dynasties  of  the  Early  Empire,  and  that  they  copied  the  arts  and 
literature  of  that  period  as  far  as  possible,  and,  this  being  so,  the  texts  on 
the  monuments  which  have  been  made  the  standard  of  comparison  for  that 
on  the  coffin  of  Mycerinus  may  be  themselves  at  fault  in  their  variants.  If 
the  text  on  the  cover  could  be  proved  to  differ  as  much  from  an  undisputed 
IVth  dynasty  text  as  it  does  from  those  even  of  the  Vlth  dynasty,  the 
philological  argument  might  have  some  weight ;  but  even  this  would  not 
get  rid  of  the  fact  that  the  cover  itself  is  a  genuine  relic  of  the  IVth 
dynasty. 

VOL.    I.  C 


1 8  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

for  those  who  added  the  inscription  would  certainly  have 
chosen  it  from  a  text  of  the  time  of  Mycerinus. 

In  the  Vth  dynasty  we  have,  in  an  increased  number 
of  inastabahs  and  other  monuments,  evidence  of  the  exten- 
sion of  religious  ceremonials,  including  the  celebration  of 
funeral  rites  ;  but  a  text  forminof  the  Book  of  the  Dead  as 
a  whole  does  not  occur  until  the  reign  of  Unas  (3333  B.C.), 
the  last  king  of  the  dynasty,  who  according  to  the  Turin 
Papyrus  reigned  thirty  years.  This  monarch  built  on  the 
plain  of  Sakkarah  a  stone  pyramid  about  sixty-two  feet 
high,  each  side  measuring  about  two  hundred  feet  at  the 
base.  In  the  time  of  Perring  and  Vyse  it  was  surrounded 
by  heaps  of  broken  stone  and  rubbish,  the  result  of  repeated 
attempts  to  open  it,  and  with  the  casing  stones,  which 
consisted  of  compact  limestone  from  the  quarries  of  Tura.^ 
In  February,  188 1,  M.  Maspero  began  to  clear  the  pyramid, 
and  soon  after  he  succeeded  in  making  an  entrance  into 
the  innermost  chambers,  the  walls  of  which  were  covered 
with  hieroglyphic  inscriptions,  arranged  in  perpendicular 
lines  and  painted  in  green. ^  The  condition  of  the  interior 
showed  that  at  some  time  or  other  thieves  had  already 
succeeded  in  making  an  entrance,  for  the  cover  of  the  black 
basalt  sarcophagus  of  Unas  had  been  wrenched  off  and 
moved  near  the  door  of  the  sarcophagus  chamber  ;  the 
paving  stones  had  been  pulled  up  in  the  vain  attempt  to 
find  buried  treasure ;  the  mummy  had  been  broken  to 
pieces,  and  nothing  remained  of  it  except  the  right  arm,  a 
tibia,  and  some  fragments  of  the  skull  and  body.  The 
inscriptions  which  covered  certain  walls  and  corridors  in 
the  tomb  were  afterwards  published  by  M.  Maspero.^  The 
appearance  of  the  text  of  Unas'^  marks  an  era  in  the  history 
of  the  Book  of  the  Dead,  and  its  translation  must  be 
regarded  as  one  of  the  greatest  triumphs  of  Egyptological 
decipherment,  for  the  want  of  determinatives  in  many 
places  in  the  text,  and  the  archaic  spelling  of  many  of  the 

^  Vyse,  Pyra?nids  0/  Gizek,  p.  51. 

2  Maspero,  Reciieil  de  Travnux,  t.  Ill,  p.  178. 

^  See  Rccueil  de  Travaux,  t.  Ill,  pp.  177-224;  t.  IV,  pp.  41-78. 

*  In  1881  Dr.  Brugsch  described  two  pyramids  of  the  Vlth  dynasty 
inscribed  with  religious  texts  similar  to  those  found  in  the  pyramid  of  Unas, 
and  translated  certain  passages  {Aeg.  Zeitschri/i,  Bd.  XIX,  pp.  1-15);  see 
also  Birch  in  Trans.  Soc.  Bibl.  Arch.  1881,  pp.  iii  ff. 


The  Pyramid  Texts  19 

words  and  passages  presented  difficulties  which  were  not 
easily  overcome.^  Here,  for  the  first  time,  it  was  shown 
that  the  Book  of  the  Dead  was  no  compilation  of  a  com- 
paratively late  period  in  the  history  of  Egyptian  civilization, 
but  a  work  belonging  to  a  very  remote  antiquity  ;  and  it 
followed  naturally  that  texts  which  were  then  known,  and 
which  were  thought  to  be  themselves  original  ancient  texts, 
proved  to  be  only  versions  which  had  passed  through  two 
or  more  successive  revisions. 

Continuing  his  excavations  at  Sakkarah,  M.  Maspero 
opened  the  pyramid  of  Teta,~  king  of  Egypt  about  3300  B.C., 
which  Vyse  thought^  had  never  been  entered,  and  of  which, 
in  his  day,  the  masonry  on  one  side  only  could  be  seen. 
Here  again  it  was  found  that  thieves  had  already  been  at 
work,  and  that  they  had  smashed  in  pieces  walls,  floors, 
and  many  other  parts  of  the  chambers  in  their  frantic 
search  for  treasure.  As  in  the  case  of  the  pyramid  of 
Unas,  certain  chambers,  etc.,  of  this  tomb  were  found 
covered  with  inscriptions  in  hieroglyphs,  but  of  a  smaller 
size.*  A  brief  examination  of  the  text  showed  it  to  be 
formed  of  a  series  of  extracts  from  the  Book  of  the  Dead, 
some  of  which  were  identical  with  those  in  the  pyramid  of 
Unas.  Thus  was  broug-ht  to  lio-ht  a  Book  of  the  Dead 
of  the  time  of  the  first  king^  of  the  Vlth  dynasty. 

The  pyramid  of  Pepi  I,  king  of  Egypt  about  3233  B.C., 
was  next  opened.^  It  is  situated  in  the  central  group  at 
Sakkarah,   and    is    commonly    known    as    the    pyramid    of 

^  The  pyramid  which  bore  among  the  Arabs  the  name  Mastabat 
al-Far^iln, or  "Pharaoh's  Bench,"  was  excavated  by  Mariette  in  1858,  and, 
because  he  found  the  name  of  Unas  painted  on  certain  blocks  of  stone,  he 
concluded  it  was  the  tomb  of  Unas.  M.  Maspero's  excavations  have,  as 
Dr.  Lepsius  observes  {Aeg.  Zeitschrift,  Bd.  XIX,  p.  15),  set  the  matter 
right. 

2  The  mummy  of  the  king  had  been  taken  out  of  the  sarcophagus 
through  a  hole  which  the  thieves  had  made  in  it ;  it  was  broken  by  them 
in  pieces,  and  the  only  remains  of  it  found  by  M.  Maspero  consisted  of  an 
arm  and  shoulder.  Parts  of  the  wooden  coffin  are  preserved  in  the  Gizah 
Museum. 

2   The  Pyramids  of  Gizeh,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  39. 

*  They  were  cojjied  in  1882,  and  published  by  M.  Maspero  in  Recueil 
de  Travaux,  t.  V,  pp.  1-59. 

^  The  broken  mummy  of  this  king,  together  with  fragments  of  its 
bandages,  was  found  lying  on  the  floor. 

^  See  Vyse,  Pyramids  of  Gizeh,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  51. 

C    2 


20  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

Shekh  Abu-Mansur.^  Certain  chambers  and  other  parts 
of  the  tomb  were  found  to  be  covered  with  hieroglyphic 
texts,  which  not  only  repeated  in  part  those  which  had 
been  found  in  the  pyramids  of  Unas  and  Teta,  but  also 
contained  a  considerable  number  of  additional  sections  of 
the  Book  of  the  Dead."^  In  the  same  neighbourhood 
M.  Maspero  cleared  out  the  pyramid  of  Mer-en-Ra,  the 
fourth  king  of  the  Vlth  dynasty,  about  3200  b.c.  ;^  and  the 
pyramid  of  Pepi  II,  the  fifth  king  of  the  Vlth  dynasty, 
about  3166  B.C."* 

Thus  we  have  before  the  close  of  the  Vlth  dynasty  five 
copies  of  a  series  of  texts  which  formed  the  Book  of  the 
Dead  of  that  period,  and  an  extract  from  a  well-known 
passage  of  that  work  on  the  wooden  coffin  of  Mycerinus  ; 
we  have  also  seen  from  a  number  of  77tastabaks  and  stelae 
that  the  funeral  ceremonies  connected  with  the  Book  of  the 
Dead  were  performed  certainly  in  the  Ilnd,  and  with 
almost  equal  certainty  in  the  1st  dynasty.  It  is  easy  to 
show  that  certain  sections  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead  of  this 
period  were  copied  and  used  in  the  following  dynasties 
down  to  a  period  about  a.d.  200. 

The  fact  that  not  only  in  the  pyramids  of  Unas   and 

^  It  had  been  partially  opened  by  jSIariette  in  May,  1880,  but  the 
clearance  of  sand  was  not  effected  until  early  in  1881. 

^  The  full  text  is  given  by  Maspero  in  Recueil  de  Travaux,  t.  V, 
PP-  157-58,  Piiris,  1884;  t.  VII,  pp.  145-76,  Paris,  1886;  and  t.  VIII, 
pp.  87-120,  Paris,  1886  ;   and  in  Sethe,  Pyramidentexie,  2  vols. 

^  It  was  opened  early  in  January,  1880,  by  Mariette,  who  seeing  that 
the  sarcophagus  chamber  was  inscribed,  abandoned  his  theory  that  pyramids 
never  contained  inscriptions,  or  that  if  they  did  they  were  not  royal  tombs. 
The  hieroglyphic  texts  were  published  by  Maspero  in  Recueil  de  Travaux^ 
t.  IX,  pp.  177-91,  Paris,  1887;  t.  X,  pp.  1-29,  Paris,  1888;  and  t.  XI, 
pp.  1-31,  Paris,  1889.  The  alabaster  vase  in  the  British  Museum, 
No.  449:^,  came  from  this  pyramid. 

■*  This  p\ramid  is  a  little  larger  than  the  others  of  the  period,  and  is 
built  in  steps  of  small  stones  ;  it  is  commonly  called  by  the  Arabs  Haravt 
al-Mastabai,  because  it  is  near  the  building  usually  called  M^as(a/>af 
al-Far'fin.  See  Vyse,  Pyramids,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  52.  The  hieroglyphic  texts  are 
publisiied  by  Maspero  in  Recueil  de  Travaux,  t.  XII,  pp.  53-95,  and 
pp.  136-95,  Paris,  1892,  and  t.  XIV,  pp.  125-52,  Paris,  1892.  There  is 
little  doubt  that  this  pyramid  was  broken  into  more  than  once  in  Christian 
times,  and  that  the  early  collectors  of  Egyptian  antiquities  obtained  the 
beautiful  alabaster  vases  inscribed  with  the  cartouches  and  titles  of  Pepi  II 
from  those  who  had  access  to  the  sarcophagus  chamber.  Among  such 
objects  in  the  British  Museum  collection,  Nos.  4492,  22559,  22758,  and 
22817  ^re  fine  examples. 


Book  of  the  Dead  in  the  Vlth  Dynasty        21 

Teta,  but  also  in  those  of  Pepi  I  and  his  immediate  suc- 
cessors, we  find  selected  passages,  suggests  that  the  Book 
of  the  Dead  was,  even  in  those  early  times,  so  extensive 
that  even  a  king  was  fain  to  make  from  it  a  selection  only 
of  the  passages  which  suited  his  individual  taste  or  were 
considered  sufficient  to  secure  his  welfare  in  the  next  world. 
In  the  pyramids  of  Teta,  Pepi  I,  Mer-en-Ra,  and  Pepi  II 
are  found  many  texts  which  are  identical  with  those 
employed  by  their  predecessors,  and  an  examination  of  the 
inscription  of  Pepi  II  will  show  that  about  three-fourths  of 
the  whole  may  be  found  in  the  monuments  of  his  ancestors. 
What  principle  guided  each  king  in  the  selection  of  his 
texts,  or  whether  the  additions  in  each  represent  religious 
developments,  it  is  impossible  to  say  ;  but,  as  the  Egyptian 
religion  cannot  have  remained  stationary  in  every  particular, 
it  is  probable  that  some  texts  reflect  the  changes  in  the 
opinions  of  the  priests  upon  matters  of  doctrine.^  The 
"Pyramid  Texts"  prove  that  each  section  of  the  religious 
books  of  the  Egyptians  was  originally  a  separate  and  indepen- 
dent composition,  that  it  was  written  with  a  definite  object, 
and  that  it  might  be  arranged  in  any  order  in  a  series  of 
similar  texts.  What  preceded  or  what  followed  it  was  never 
taken  into  consideration  by  the  scribe,  although  it  seems,  at 
times,  as  if  traditions  had  assigned  a  sequence  to  certain  texts. 
That  events  of  contemporary  history  were  sometimes 
reflected  in  the  Book  of  the  Dead  of  the  early  dynasties  is 
proved  by  the  following.     We  learn  from   the  inscription 

upon    the    tomb    of   Heru-khuf  R    '^  ®  vN^^Lt^^  at   Aswan,^ 


^  A  development  has  been  observed  in  the  plan  of  ornamenting  the 
interiors  of  the  pyramids  of  the  Vth  and  Vlth  dynasties.  In  that  of  Unas 
about  one-quarter  of  the  sarcophagus  chamber  is  covered  with  architectural 
decorations,  and  the  hieroglyphs  are  large,  well  spaced,  and  enclosed  in 
broad  lines.  But  as  we  advance  in  the  Vlth  dynasty,  the  space  set  apart 
for  decorative  purposes  becomes  less,  the  hieroglyphs  are  smaller,  the 
lines  are  crowded,  and  the  inscriptions  overflow  into  the  chambers  and 
corridors,  which  in  the  Vth  dynasty  were  left  blank.  See  Maspero  in 
Revue  des  Religions,  t.  XI,  p.  124. 

2  The  full  text  from  this  tomb  and  a  discussion  on  its  contents  are 
given  by  Schiaparelli,  Una  tomba  egiziana  inedita  della  VI'^  dinastia  con 
inscrizioni  storiche  e  geografiche,  in  Atti  della  R.  Accademia  dei  Lificei, 
anno  CCLXXXIX,  Ser.  4%  Classe  di  Scienze  Morali,  etc.,  t.  X,  Rome,  1893, 
pp.  22-53.  This  text  has  been  treated  by  Erman  {Z.D.M.G.,  Bd.  XLVI, 
1892,  pp.  574  ff.),  who  first  pointed  out  the  reference  to  the  pigmy  in  the 
Pyramid  Texts,  and  by  Maspero  in  Revue  Critique,  Paris,  1892,  p.  366. 


22  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

that  this  governor  of  Elephantine  was  ordered  to  bring  for 
King  Pepi   IP  a  pigmy,  ^^^^^^4l'^  ^^^^   ^^^   interior  of 

Africa,  to  dance  before  the  king  and  amuse  him  ;  and  he 
was  promised  that,  if  he  succeeded  in  bringing  the  pigmy 
aHve  and  in  good  heahh,  his  Majesty  would  confer  upon 
him  a  higher  rank  and  dignity  than  that  which  King  Assa 
conferred  upon  his  minister  Ba-ur-Tettet,  who  performed 
this  much  appreciated  service  for  his  master.^  Now  Assa 
was  the  eighth  king  of  the  Vth  dynasty,  and  Pepi  II  was  the 
fifth  king  of  the  Vlth  dynasty,  and  between  the  reigns  of 
these  kings  there  was,  according  to  M.  Maspero,  an  interval 
of  at  least  sixty-four,  but  more  probably  eighty,  years. 
But  in  the  text  in  the  pyramid  of  Pepi  I,  which  must  have 
been  drafted  at  some  period  between  the  reigns  of  these 
kings,  we  have  the  passage  :  "  Hail  thou  who  [at  thy  will] 
"  makest  to  pass  over  to  the  Field  of  Aaru  the  soul  that  is 
"  right  and  true,  or  dost  make  shipwreck  of  it.  Ra-meri 
"  (i.e.  Pepi  I)  is  right  and  true  in  respect  of  heaven  and 
"  in  respect  of  earth,  Pepi  is  right  and  true  in  respect  of  the 
"  island  of  the  earth  whither  he  swimmeth  and  where  he 
"  arriveth.  He  who  is  between  the  thighs  of  Nut 
"  (i.e.,  Pepi)  is  the  pigmy  who  danceth  [like]  the  god,  and 
"  who  pleaseth  the  heart  of  the  god  [Osiris]  before  his  great 
"  throne  ....  The  two  beings  who  are  over  the  throne  of 
"  the  great  god  proclaim  Pepi  to  be  sound  and  healthy, 
"  [therefore]  Pepi  shall  sail  in  the  boat  to  the  beautiful  field 
"  of  the  great  god,  and  he  shall  do  therein  that  which  is 
"  done  by  those  to  whom  veneration  is  due."  "^     Here  clearly 

^  See  Erman  in  Aeg.  Zeitschrift,  Bd.  XXXI,  pp.  65  ff. 

2  On  the  pigmy  see  Stanley,  Darkest  Africa,  Vol.  i,  p.  198  :  Vol.  II, 
pp.  4of. ;  Schweinfurth,  Im  Herzen  von  Afrika,  Bd.  II,  Kap.  16,  pp.  131  fF. 
That  the  pigmies  paid  tribute  to  the  Egyptians  is  certain  from  the  passage 

"  pigmies  came  to  him  from  the  lands  of  the  South  having  things  of  service 
"  for  his  palace  " ;  see  Diimichen,  Geschichtc  des  altcn  Aegyptens,  Berlin, 
1887,  p.  7. 


■^  For  the  hieroglyphic  text  see  Maspero,  Recneil  de  Travaux,  t.  VII, 
pp.  162,  163  ;  and  t.  XI,  p.  11. 


The  Hermetic  Books  23 

we  have  a  reference  to  the  historical  fact  of  the  importation 
of  a  pigmy  from  the  regions  south  of  Nubia  ;  and  the  idea 
which  seems  to  have  been  uppermost  in  the  mind  of  him 
who  drafted  the  text  was  that  as  the  pigmy  pleased  the  king 
for  whom  he  was  brought  in  this  world,  even  so  might  the 
dead  Pepi  please  the  god  Osiris^  in  the  next  world.  As 
the  pigmy  was  brought  by  boat  to  the  king,  so  might  Pepi 
be  brought  by  boat  to  the  island  wherein  the  god  dwelt ; 
as  the  conditions  made  by  the  king  were  fulfilled  by  him 
that  brought  the  pigmy,  even  so  might  the  conditions  made 
by  Osiris  concerning  the  dead  be  fulfilled  by  him  that 
transported  Pepi  to  his  presence.  The  wording  of  the 
passage  amply  justifies  the  assumption  that  this  addition 
was  made  to  the  text  after  the  mission  of  Assa,  and  during 
the  Vlth  dynasty.^ 

Like  other  works  of  a  similar  nature,  however,  the 
Pyramid  Texts,  which  represent  the  Heliopolitan  Recen- 
sion, afford  us  no  information  as  to  their  authorship.  In 
the  later  versions  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead  certain  Chapters^ 
are  stated  to  be  the  work  of  the  god  Thoth.  They  cer- 
tainly belong  to  that  class  of  literature  which  the  Greeks 
called  "Hermetic,"*  and  it  is  pretty  certain  that  under  some 
group  they  were  included  in  the  list  of  the  forty-two  works 
which,  according  to  Clement  of  Alexandria,^  constituted 
the  sacred  books  of  the  Egyptians.^  As  Thoth,  whom  the 
Greeks  called  Hermes,  is  in  Egyptian  texts  styled  "  lord  of 
divine  books,  "^  "scribe  of  the  Company  of  the  Gods,"^  and 
"lord  of  divine  speech,"^  this  ascription   is  well  founded. 

1  Pietschmann  thinks  {Aeg.  Zeitschrift^  Bd.  XXXI,  pp.  73  f.)  that  the 
Satyrs,  who  are  referred  to  by  Diodorus  (i,  XVIII)  as  the  companions  and 
associates  of  Osiris  in  Ethiopia,  have  their  origin  in  the  pigmies. 

-  The  whole  question  of  the  pigmy  in  the  text  of  Pepi  I  has  been 
discussed  by  Maspero  in  Recueil  de  Travaux,  t.  XIV,  pp.  186  ff. 

3  Chapters  XXXb,  CLXIV,  XXXVIIb,  and  CXLVIII.  Although 
these  Chapters  were  found  at  Hermopolis,  the  city  of  Thoth,  it  does  not 
follow  that  they  were  drawn  up  there. 

*  See  Birch,  in  Bunsen,  Egypt's  Place  in  Universal  History,  Vol.  V, 
p.  125  ;  Naville,  Todtenbuch  (Einleitung),  p.  26. 

°  Stromata,  VI,  4,  35,  ed.  Dindorff,  t.  Ill,  p.  155. 

^  On  the  sacred  books  of  the  Egyptians  see  also  lamblichus,  JDe 
Mysteriis,  ed.  Parthey,  Berlin,  1857,  pp.  260,  261 ;  Lepsius,  Chronologie, 
pp.  45  ff.  ;  and  Brugsch,  Aegvpiolo^ie,  p.  149. 

?1i         '-1 


24 


The  Papyrus  of  Ani 


The  Pyramid  Texts  are  versions  of  ancient  religious  com- 
positions which  the  priests  of  the  College  or  School  of  Anu^ 
succeeded  in  establishing  as  the  authorized  version  of  the 
Book  of  the  Dead  in  the  first  six  dynasties.  Ra,  the  local 
form  of  the  Sun-god,  usurps  the  place  occupied  by  the 
more  ancient  form  Temu,  but  before  the  close  of  the  Vlth 
dynasty  Osiris  had  taken  his  place  in  the  Pyramid  Texts 
as  the  greatest  of  the  gods.  The  great  influence  of  the 
Anu  school  of  priests  even  in  the  time  of  Unas  is  proved 
by  the  following  passage  from  the  text  in  his  pyramid  : 
"  O  God,  thy  Anu  is  Unas  ;  O  God,  thy  Anu  is  Unas. 
"  O  Ra,  Anu  is  Unas,  thy  Anu  is  Unas,  O  Ra.  The 
"  mother  of  Unas  is  Anu,  the  father  of  Unas  is  Anu  ;  Unas 
"  himself  is  Anu,  and  was  born  in  Anu."~  Elsewhere  we 
are  told  that  Unas  "  cometh  to  the  great  bull  which  cometh 
"  forth  from  Anu,^  and  that  he  uttereth  words  of  magical 
"  import  in  Anu."*  In  Anu  the  god  Temu  produced  the 
gods  Shu  and  Tefnut,^  and  in  Anu  dwelt   the  great  and 

[I       Anu,  the   metropolis   of  the  Xlllth  Nome  of  Lower  Egypt; 

see  Briigsch,  Diet.  Giog.,  p.  41  ;  de  Rouge,  Geographic  Aneicfine  de  la 
Basse-Egypte,  p.  81  ;  and  AmeHneau,  La  Geographic  de  VEgypte  h 
VEpoque  Copie,  p.  287.      Anu  is  7^^  Genesis  xH,  45  ;  ^'ifc^  Genesis  xh,  50  ; 

pt^  Ezekiel  xxx,  17;  and  Beth  Shemesh,  tTptt?  Jl^l  Jeremiah  xHii,   13; 

and  the  HeHopoHs  of  the  Greek  writers  ('HX(ow7ro\<<;,  Strabo,  XVII,  i, 
§§  27,  28;  Herodotus,  II,  3  ;  Diodorus,  I,  57,  4). 


-{±m  ii  mutx^ loll 

Maspero,   Unas,  11.  591,  592  ;  and  ep.  Pepi  I,  11.  690,  691. 


O 


"~l  ?  1^  1p^ '^^  1 

Maspero,    Pepi  /, 


The  Anu  of  Heaven  25 

oldest  Company  of  the  Gods,  Temu,  Shu,  Tefnut,  Keb,  Nut, 
Osiris,  Isis,  Set,  and  Nephthys.^  The  abode  of  the  blessed 
in  heaven  was  called  Anu,-  and  it  was  asserted  that  the  souls 
of  the  just  were  there  united  to  their  spiritual  or  glorified 
bodies,  and  that  they  lived  there  face  to  face  with  the  deity 
for  all  eternity.^  Judging  from  the  fact  that  the  texts  in 
the  tombs  of  Heru-hetep  and  Neferu,  and  those  inscribed 
upon  the  sarcophagus  of  Taka,  all  of  the  Xlth  and  Xllth 
dynasties,  differ  in  extent  only  and  not  in  character  or 
contents  from  those  of  the  royal  pyramids  of  Sakkarah  of 
the  Vth  and  Vlth  dynasties,  it  has  been  declared  that  the 
religion  as  well  as  the  art  of  the  first  Theban  Empire  is 
nothing  but  a  slavish  copy  of  that  of  Northern  Egypt."* 

1  The  Pyramid  of  Fepi  II,  1.  665. 

2  In  reading  Egyptian  religious  texts,  the  existence  of  the  heavenly 
Anu,  which  was  to  the  Egyptians  what  Jerusalem  was  to  the  Jews,  and 
what  Mecca  still  is  to  the  Muhammadans,  must  be  remembered.  The 
heavenly  Anu  was  the  capital  of  the  mythological  world  (see  Naville, 
Todtetibuch  (Einleitung),  p.  27),  and  was,  to  the  spirits  of  men,  what  the 
earthly  Anu  was  to  their  bodies,  i.e.,  the  abode  of  the  gods  and  the  centre 
and  source  of  all  divine  instruction.  Like  many  other  mythological  cities, 
such  as  Abtu,  Tetu,  Pe,  Tep,  Khemenu,  etc.,  the  heavenly  Anu  had  no 
geographical  position. 

^  The  importance  of  Anu  and  its  gods  in  the  Vlth  dynasty  is  well 
indicated  by  a  prayer  from  the  pyramid  of  Pepi  II  (for  the  texts  see 
Maspero,  Recueil,  t.  X,  p.  8,  and  t.  XII,  p.  146),  which  reads  : — 

"  Hail,  ye  Great  Nine  Gods  who  dwell  in  Anu,  grant  ye  that  Pepi 
"  may  flourish,  and  grant  ye  that  this  pyramid  of  Pepi,  this  building  built 
"  for  eternity,  may  flourish,  even  as  the  name  of  the  god  Temu,  the  chief 
"  of  the  great  Company  of  the  Nine  Gods,  doth  flourish.  If  the  name  of 
"  Shu,  the  lord  of  the  celestial  shrine  in  Anu  flourisheth,  then  Pepi 
"  shall  flourish,  and  this  his  pyramid  shall  flourish,  and  this  his  work 
"  shall  endure  to  all  eternity.  If  the  name  of  Tefnut,  the  lady  of  the 
"  terrestrial  shrine  in  Anu  endureth,  the  name  of  Pepi  shall  endure,  and 
"  this    pyramid   shall    endure   to   all   eternity.     If  the  name  of  Keb 

"  flourisheth the  name  of  Pepi  shall  flourish,  and  this  pyramid 

*'  shall  flourish,  and  this  his  work  shall  endure  to  all  eternity.  If  the 
"  name  of  Nut  flourisheth  in  the  temple  of  Shenth  in  Anu,  the  name  of 
"  Pepi  shall  flourish,  and  this  pyramid  shall  flourish,  and  this  his  work 
"  shall  endure  to  all  eternity.  If  the  name  of  Osiris  flourisheth  in  This, 
"  the  name  of  Pepi  shall  flourish,  and  this  pyramid  shall  flourish,  and 
"  this  his  work  shall  endure  to  all  eternity.  If  the  name  of  Osiris  Khent- 
"  Amenti  flourisheth,  the  name  of  Pepi  shall  flourish,  and  this  pyramid 
"  shall  flourish,  and  this  his  work  shall  endure  to  all  eternity.  If  the  name 
"  of  Set  flourisheth  in  Nubt,  the  name  of  Pepi  shall  flourish,  and  this 
"  pyramid  shall  flourish,  and  this  his  work  shall  endure  to  all  eternity." 
■*  Maspero,  la  Religion  Egyptienne  d^apres  les  Pyramides  de  la  V'  et  de 
la  VP  dynastie.     (In  Revue  des  Religions,  t.  XII,  pp.  138,  139.) 


26  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

The  Theban  Recension,  which  was  used  throughout 
Egypt  by  everyone  who  could  afford  to  be  "buried,"  from 
the  XV^IIIth  to  the  XX  1st  dynasty,  was  commonly  written 
on  papyri  in  the  hieroglyphic  character,  the  scribe  invari- 
ably beginning  his  copying  at  the  left-hand  end  of  the 
papyrus  roll,  and  working  towards  the  right.  The  text  is 
written  in  black  ink  in  perpendicular  rows  of  hieroglyphs, 
which  are  separated  from  each  other  by  black  lines  ;  the 
titles  of  the  Chapters  or  sections,  and  certain  parts  of  the 
Chapters  and  the  Rubrics  belonging  thereto,  are  written  in 
red  ink.  A  steady  development  in  the  illumination  of  the 
Vignettes  is  observable  in  the  papyri  of  this  period.  At 
the  beginning  of  the  XVIilth  dynasty  the  Vignettes  are  in 
black  outline,  as  we  see  in  the  Papyrus  of  Nebseni ;  but 
we  see  in  the  Papyrus  of  luau,  a  father-in-law  of  Amen- 
hetep  III,  that  the  Vignettes  are  painted  in  reds,  greens, 
yellows,  white,  and  other  colours,  and  that  the  whole  of  the 
text  and  Vignettes  are  enclosed  in  a  red  and  yellow  border. 
Originally  the  text  was  the  most  important  part  of  the 
work,  and  both  it  and  its  Vignettes  were  the  work  of  the 
scribe  ;  gradually,  however,  the  brilliandy  illuminated  Vig- 
nettes were  more  and  more  cared  for,  and  when  the  skill 
of  the  scribe  failed,  the  artist  was  called  in.  In  many  fine 
papyri  of  the  Theban  Period  it  is  clear  that  the  whole  plan 
of  the  Vignettes  of  a  papyrus  was  set  out  by  artists,  who 
often  failed  to  leave  sufficient  space  for  the  texts  to  which 
they  belonged  ;  in  consequence  many  lines  of  Chapters  are 
often  omitted,  and  the  last  few  lines  of  some  texts  are  so 
much  crowded  as  to  be  almost  illegible.  The  frequent 
clerical  errors  also  show  that,  while  an  artist  of  the  greatest 
skill  might  be  employed  on  the  Vignettes,  the  execution  of 
the  text  was  left   to  a  careless,  or   even   ionorant,  scribe. 

A  •  1  •  •  O  ' 

Agam,  the  artist  at  times  arranged  his  Vignettes  in  wrong 
order,  and  it  is  occasionally  evident  that  neither  artist  nor 
scribe  understood  the  matter  upon  which  he  was  engaged. 
According  to  M.  Maspero^  the  scribes  of  the  Vlth  dynasty 
did  not  understand  the  texts  which  they  were  drafting,  and 
in  the  XlXth  dynasty  the  scribe  of  a  papyrus  now  preserved 
at  Berlin  knew  or  cared  so  little  about  the  text  which  he 
was  copying  that  he  transcribed  the  LXXVIIth  Chapter 

^  Recueil  de  Travaux,  t.  IV,  p.  62. 


The  Theban  Recension  27 

from  the  wrong  end,  and  apparently  never  discovered  his 
error,  although  he  concluded  the  Chapter  with  its  title. ^ 
Originally  each  copy  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead  was  written 
to  order,  but  soon  the  custom  obtained  of  preparing  copies 
with  blank  spaces  in  which  the  name  of  the  purchaser 
might  be  inserted  ;  and  many  of  the  errors  in  spelling  and 
most  of  the  omissions  of  words  are  no  doubt  due  to  the 
haste  with  which  such  "stock"  copies  were  written  by  the 
members  of  the  priestly  caste,  whose  profession  it  was  to 
copy  them. 

The  papyri  upon  which  copies  of  the  Theban  Recension 
were  written  vary  in  length  from  about  20  to  90  feet,  and 
in  width  from  14  to  18  inches;  in  the  XVIIIth  dynasty 
the  layers  of  the  papyrus  are  of  a  thicker  texture  and  of  a 
darker  colour  than  in  the  succeeding  dynasties.  The  art 
of  making  great  lengths  of  papyrus  of  light  colour  and  fine 
texture  attained  its  highest  perfection  in  the  XlXth  dynasty. 
An  examination  of  Theban  papyri  shows  that  the  work  of 
writing  and  illuminating  a  fine  copy  of  the  Book  of  the 
Dead  was  frequently  distributed  between  two  or  more 
groups  of  artists  and  scribes,  and  that  the  sections  were 
afterwards  joined  up  into  a  whole.  Occasionally  by  error 
two  groups  of  men  would  transcribe  the  same  Chapter  ; 
hence  in  the  Papyrus  of  Ani,  Chapter  XVIII  occurs  twice. 

The  sections  or  Chapters  of  the  Theban  Recension 
are  a  series  of  separate  and  distinct  compositions,  which,  like 
the  sections  of  the  Pyramid  Texts,  had  no  fixed  order  either 
on  coffins  or  in  papyri.  Unlike  these  texts,  however,  with 
very  few  exceptions  each  composition  has  a  special  title 
and  Vignette  which  indicate  its  purpose.  The  general 
selection  of  the  Chapters  for  a  papyrus  seems  to  have  been 
left  to  the  individual  fancy  of  the  purchaser  or  scribe,  but 
certain  of  them  were  no  doubt  absolutely  necessary  for  the 
preservation  of  the  body  of  the  deceased  in  the  tomb,  and 
for  the  welfare  of  his  soul  in  its  new  state  of  existence. 
Traditional  selections  would  probably  be  respected,  and 
recent  selections  approved  by  any  dominant  school  of  reli- 
gious thought  in  Egypt  were  without  doubt  accepted. 

While  in  the  period  of  the  Pyramid  Texts  the  various 
sections  were  said  or  sung  by  priests,  probably  assisted  by 

^  Naville,  Todtenbuch  (Einleitung),  pp.  41-43. 


28  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

some  members  of  the  family  of  the  deceased,  the  welfare 
of  his  soul  and  body  being  proclaimed  for  him  as  an 
established  fact,  in  the  Theban  Recension  the  hymns  and 
prayers  to  the  gods  were  put  into  the  mouth  of  the 
deceased.  As  none  but  the  great  and  wealthy  could  afford 
the  ceremonies  which  were  performed  in  the  early  dynasties, 
economy  was  probably  the  chief  cause  of  this  change,  which 
had  come  about  at  Thebes  as  early  as  the  Xllth  dynasty. 
Little  by  little  the  ritual  portions  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead 
disappeared,  until  finally,  in  the  Theban  Recension,  the  only 
Chapters  of  this  class  which  remain  are  the  XXI  Ind, 
XXIIIrd,  CVth,  CXXXVIIth,  and  CLIst.i  Every  Chap- 
ter and  prayer  of  this  recension  was  to  be  said  in  the  next 
world,  where  the  words,  properly  uttered,  enabled  the 
deceased  to  overcome  every  foe  and  to  attain  to  the  life  of 
the  perfected  soul  which  dwelt  in  a  spiritual  body  in  the 
abode  of  the  blessed. 

The  common  name  for  the  Book  of  the  Dead  in  the 
Theban    Period,    and   probably   also    before    this   date,    is 

rn    v^  '   pert   em   kru,   which    words   have    been 


variously  translated:  "manifested  in  the  light,"  "coming 
forth  from  the  day,"  "coming  forth  by  day,"  "la  manifesta- 
tion au  jour,"  "la  manifestation  a  la  lumiere,"  "[Kapitel 
von]  der  Erscheinung  im  Lichte,"  "  Erscheinen  am  Tage," 
"[Caput]  egrediendi  in  lucem,"  etc.  This  name,  however, 
had  probably  a  meaning  for  the  Egyptians  which  has  not 
yet  been  rendered  in  a  modern  language,  and  one  impor- 
tant idea  in  connection  with  the  whole  work  is  expressed 
by  another  title"  which  calls  it  "the  chapter  of  making 
strong  ((?r  perfect)  the  KhuT 

Jn  the  Theban  Recension  the  main  principles  of  the 
Egyptian  religion  which  were  held  in  the  times  when  the 
Pyramid  Texts  were  written  are  maintained,  and  the  views 
concerning  the  eternal  existence  of  the  soul  remain  unaltered. 
Many  passages  in  the  work,  however,  show  that  modifica- 
tions and  developments  in  details  have  taken  place,   and 

^  See  Naville,  Todtenhuch  (Einleitung),  p.  20.  On  the  titles  "Book  of 
the  Dead  "  and  "  Rituel  Funeraire  "  which  have  been  given  to  these  texts, 
see  Lepsius,  Todfefiduck,  p.  3  ;  De  Rouge,  Revue  ArcMologique,  N.S.,  t.  I, 
i860,  pp.  69-100. 

^  See  NavilJe,  Einleitung,  p.  24. 


Chapters  of  the  Theban  Recension  29 

much  that  is  not  met  with  in  the  early  dynasties  appears, 
so  far  as  we  know,  for  the  first  time.  The  Vignettes,  too, 
are  additions  to  the  work  ;  but,  although  they  depict  scenes 
in  the  life  beyond  the  grave,  they  do  not  seem  to  form 
a  connected  series,  and  it  is  doubtful  if  they  are  arranged 
on  any  definite  plan.  A  general  idea  of  the  contents  of 
this  version  may  be  gathered  from  the  following  list  of 
Chapters^ : — 

Chapter  I.  Here  begin  the  Chapters  of  "  Coming 
Forth  by  Day,"  and  of  the  songs  of  praise  and  glorifying,'^ 
and  of  coming  forth  from,  and  going  into,  the  Underworld.^ 
With  Rubric. 

Vignette  :  The  funeral  procession  from  the  house  of 
the  dead  to  the  tomb. 

Chapter   lb.      The  Chapter  of  making  the  Sahu,   or 

Spirit-body  |  t  ,  to  go  into  the  Tuat  x  fc\       .  on  the 

day  of  the  burial.*     With  Rubric. 

Vignette  ;  Anubis  standing  by  the  bier  upon  which 
the  mummy  of  the  deceased  is  laid. 

Chapter  II.  [The  Chapter  of]  coming  forth  by  day 
and  of  living  after  death. 

Vignette  :  A  man  standing,  holding  a  staff  I . 

Chapter  III.  Another  Chapter  like  unto  it  {i.e.,  like 
Chapter  II).° 

This  Chapter  has  no  Vignette. 

1  The  various  Chapters  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead  were  numbered  by 
Lepsius  in  his  edition  of  the  Turin  Papyrus  in  1842.  This  papyrus, 
however,  is  a  product  of  the  Ptolemaic  Period,  and  contains  a  number  of 
Chapters  which  are  wanting  in  the  Theban  Recension.  For  convenience, 
Lepsius'  numbers  are  retained,  and  the  Chapters  which  belong  to  the 
Saite  Recension  are  indicated  by  an  asterisk. 

"  Another  title  reads  : — "The  Chapter  of  going  in  to  the  divine  chiefs 
of  Osiris  on  the  day  of  the  burial,  and  of  going  in  after  coming  forth." 
This  Chapter  had  to  be  recited  on  the  day  of  the  burial. 

3      "=1 

Khert-Neter,  the  commonest  name  for  the  tomb. 


VA 


j^ 


sma  ta,   "the  union  with   the   earth."     A  copy  of 


this  Chapter,  with  the  pictures  of  the  nine  worms  mentioned  in  the  text,  is 
given  in  the  Papyrus  of  luau  (ed.  Naville),  as  I  pointed  out  in  my  Chapters 
of  Coming  Forth  by  Day,  2nd  edition,  Vol.  I,  p.  Ixxxix,  London,  1909. 

'"  In  some  papyri  Chapters  II  and  III  are  united  and  have  only  one 
title  ;  see  Naville,  Todtenbuch,  Bd.  I,  Bl.  6. 


30  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

Chapter  IV.     Another  Chapter  of  passing  along  the 
way  over  the  earth. 

This  Chapter  has  no  Vignette. 

Chapter  V.     The  Chapter  of  not  allowing  the  deceased 
to  do  work  in  the  Underworld. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  kneeling  on  one  knee. 

Chapter  VI.     The  Chapter  of  making  ushabtiu  figures 
do  work  for  a  man  in  the  Underworld. 


Vignette  :  An  tishabti  figure 

Chapter  VII.  The  Chapter  of  passing  over  the 
accursed  back  of  Aapep,  the  evil  one. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  spearing  a  serpent. 

Chapter  VIII.  The  Chapter  of  passing  through 
Amentet,  and  of  coming  forth  by  day. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  standing  by  w. 

Chapter  IX.  The  Chapter  of  Coming  Forth  by  Day 
after  passing  through  the  tomb. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  adoring  a  ram  ^^. 

Chapter  X.     (See  Chapter  XLVIII.) 

Chapter  XI.  The  Chapter  of  a  man  coming  forth 
against  his  enemies  in  the  Underworld. 

This  Chapter  has  no  Vignette,  either  in  the  Theban  or 
Saite  Recension. 

Chapter  XII.  Another  Chapter  of  going  into,  and  of 
coming  forth  from,  the  Tuat. 

This  Chapter  has  no  Vignette,  either  in  the  Theban  or 
Saite  Recension. 

Chapter  XIII.  The  Chapter  of  going  into,  and  of 
coming  forth,  from  Amentet.  With  Rubric,  in  the  Saite 
Recension. 

This  Chapter  has  no  Vignette,  either  in  the  Theban  or 
Saite  Recension. 

Chapter  XIV.  The  Chapter  of  driving  away  shame 
from  the  heart  of  the  god  in  respect  of  the  deceased. 

This  Chapter  has  no  Vignette,  either  in  the  Theban  or 
Saite  Recension. 


Chapters  of  the  Theban  Recension  31 

Chapter  XV.  A  Hymn  of  praise  to  Ra  when  he 
riseth  in  the  eastern  horizon  of  heaven,  Hymn  and  Litany 
to  Osiris,  and  a  Hymn  to  Ra. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  adoring  Ra. 

Chapter  XVb.  I.  A  Hymn  of  praise  to  Ra  when  he 
setteth  in  the  land  of  Hfe. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  adoring  the  setting  san. 

Chapter  XVb.  2.  A  Hymn  of  praise  to  Ra- 
Harmakhis  when  he  setteth  in  the  western  horizon  of 
heaven. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  adoring  Ra. 

Chapter  XVb.  3.  Another  hidden  Chapter  of  the 
Tuat,  and  of  passing  through  the  secret  places  of  the  Under- 
world, and  of  seeing  the  Disk  when  it  setteth  in  Amentet. 

Vignette  :  The  god  or  the  deceased  spearing  a  serpent. 

Chapter  XVI.    Vignette  only,  referring  to  Chapter  XV. 

Chapter  XVII.  Here  begin  the  praises  and  glorifyings 
of  coming  out  from,  and  going  into,  the  Underworld  in  the 
beautiful  Amenta  ;  of  coming  out  by  day,  and  of  making 
transformations  and  of  changing  into  any  form  which  he 
pleaseth  ;  of  playing  at  draughts  in  the  Seh  chamber  ;  and 
of  coming  forth  in  the  form  of  a  living  soul  :  to  be  said  by 
the  deceased  after  his  death. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  playing  at  draughts  ;  the 
deceased  adoring  the  Lion-gods  of  yesterday  and  to-day  ;  the 
bier  of  Osiris  with  Isis  and  Nephthys  at  the  foot  and  head 
respectively,  etc.      See  the  descriptions  of  Plates  VH-X. 

Chapter  XVIII.     Without  tide. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  adoring  the  groups  of  gods 
belonging  to  various  cities  which  were  centres  of  the  cult 
of  Osiris. 

Chapter  XIX.*  The  Chapter  of  the  crown  of  victory. 
With  Rubric. 

This  Chapter  has  no  vignette. 

Chapter  XX.  Without  tide  in  the  Theban  Recension, 
but  in  the  Saite  Recension  it  is  called  "  Another  Chapter  of 
the  Crown  of  Victory." 

This  Chapter  has  no  vignette  either  in  the  Theban  or 
Saite  Recension. 


32  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

Chapter  XXI.  The  Chapter  of  giving  a  mouth  to 
a  man  in  the  Underworld. 

A  priest  performing  the  ceremony  of  opening  the  mouth 
on  the  deceased. 

Chapter  XXII.  The  Chapter  of  giving  a  mouth  to 
the  deceased  in  the  Underworld. 

Vignette  :  The  "guardian  of  the  scales  "  opening  the 
mouth  of  the  deceased. 

Chapter  XXIII.  The  Chapter  of  "  opening  the 
mouth  "  of  the  deceased  in  the  Underworld. 

Vignette  :  The  Seni  priest  "  opening  the  mouth  "  of 
the  deceased  with  the  Ur-kekmi  instrument. 

Chapter  XXIV.  The  Chapter  of  bringinc^  words  of 
magical  power  to  the  deceased  in  the  Underworld. 

This  Chapter  has  no  Vignette  in  the  Theban  Recension. 

Chapter  XXV.  The  Chapter  of  causing  a  man  to 
remember  his  name  in  the  Underworld. 

Vignette  :  A  priest  holding  up  t  before  the  deceased. 

Chapter  XXVI.  The  Chapter  of  giving  a  heart  to 
the  deceased  in  the  Underworld. 

Vignette  :  Anubis  giving  the  deceased  a  necklace  to 
which  is  attached  a  pectoral  with  a  heart  in  it. 

Chapter  XXVII.  The  Chapter  of  not  allowing  the 
heart  of  a  man  to  be  taken  from  him  in  the  Underworld. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  adoring  his  heart  s  ^  in  the 
presence  of  the  Four  Sons  of  Horus. 

Chapter  XXVIII.  [The  Chapter  of]  not  allowing 
the  heart  of  a  man  to  be  taken  from  him  in  the  Underworld. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  with  his  left  hand  touching 
the  heart  upon  his  breast,  kneeling  before  a  demon  holding 
a  knife. 

Chapter  XXIXa.  The  Chapter  of  not  letting  the 
heart  of  a  man  be  taken  away  from  him. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  holding  a  staff. 

Chapter  XXIXb.     The  Chapter  of  not  letting  the 
heart  of  a  man  be  taken  away  dead. 
Vignette :  Wanting. 


Chapters  of  the  Theban  Recension  33 

Chapter  XXIXc.  Another  Chapter  of  a  heart  of 
carnelian. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  sitting  on  a  chair  before  his 
heart,  which  rests  on  a  stand,  ^'^   ,  or  a  heart  only. 

Chapter  XXX.  The  Chapter  of  not  letting  the 
heart  of  a  man  be  carried  off  from  him.  With  Rubric. 
[Sai'te  Recension.] 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  adoring  a  beetle. 

Chapter  XXXa.  The  Chapter  of  not  allowing  the 
heart  of  a  man  to  be  carried  away  from  him  in  the 
Underworld. 

Vignette  :  A  heart,  '^. 

Chapter  XXXb.  The  Chapter  of  not  allowing  the 
heart  of  a  man  to  be  carried  away  from  him  in  the 
Underworld.     With  Rubric. 

Vignette :  The  deceased  being  weighed  against  his 
heart  in  the  balance  in  the  presence  of  Osiris,  "  the  great 
god,  the  prince  of  eternity." 

Chapter  XXXI.  The  Chapter  of  repulsing  the 
crocodile    which     cometh     to    carry    the    magical     words 

R  I j  ^^  ^  I   from  a  man  in  the  Underworld. 

Vignette :  The  deceased  slaying  three  or  four 
crocodiles. 

Chapter  XXXII.*  The  Chapter  of  repulsing  the 
crocodile  that  cometh  to  carry  the  magical  words  from 
a  man  in  the  Underworld. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  spearing  four  crocodiles. 

Chapter  XXXIII.  The  Chapter  of  repulsing  serpents 
of  all  kinds. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  spearing  a  snake. 

Chapter  XXXIV.  The  Chapter  of  a  man  not  being 
bitten  by  a  serpent  in  the  hall  of  the  tomb.^ 

This  Chapter  has  no  vignette  either  in  the  Theban  or 
Saite  Recension. 

Chapter  XXXV.  The  Chapter  of  not  being  eaten 
by  worms  in  the  Underworld. 

Vignette  :  Three  serpents. 

VOL.  I.  D 


34  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

Chapter  XXXVI.     The  Chapter  of  repulsing  Apshai 


(• 


Vignette  :  The  deceased  spearing  a  beetle,  or  a  pig, 
or  about  to  slay  Apshai. 

Chapter  XXXVII.     The  Chapter  of  repulsing  the 


two  Merti-o'oddesses  <=> 

Vignette  :  Two  uraei,  which  represent  the  two  eyes 
of  Ra. 

Chapter  XXXVI I  la.  The  Chapter  of  living  upon 
the  air  which  is  in  the  Underworld. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  holding  a  sail  -^C-^,  emblematic 
of  air. 

Chapter  XXXVIIIb.  The  Chapter  of  living  upon 
air  and  of  repulsing  the  two  Merti. 

Vignette :  The  deceased  attacking  three  serpents, 
a  knife  in  his  right  hand  and  a  sail  in  his  left. 

Chapter  XXXIX.  The  Chapter  of  repulsing  the 
serpent  in  the  Underworld. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  spearing  a  serpent. 

Chapter  XL.  The  Chapter  of  repulsing  the  Eater  of 
the  Ass. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  spearing  a  serpent  which  is 
biting  the  neck  of  an  ass. 

Chapter  XLI.  The  Chapter  of  avoiding  the 
slaughterings  which  are  performed  in  the  Underworld. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  spearing  a  serpent. 

Chapter  XLII.  [The  Chapter]  of  avoiding  slaughter 
in  Hensu  (Herakleopolis). 

Vignette  :  A  man  adjuring  a  serpent. 

Chapter  XLIII.  The  Chapter  of  not  allowing  the 
head  of  a  man  to  be  cut  off  from  him  in  the  Underworld. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  addressing  three  gods. 

Chapter  XLIV.  The  Chapter  of  not  dying  a  second 
time. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  seated  on  a  chair  of  state. 

Chapter  XLV.  The  Chapter  of  not  seeing  corruption. 
With  Rubric. 

Vignette  :  Anubis  holding  the  mummy  of  the  deceased. 


Chapters  of  the  Theban  Recension  35 

Chapter  XLVI.  The  Chapter  of  not  decaying,  and 
of  Hving  in  the  Underworld. 

Vignette  :  The  Heart-soul  and  Spirit-soul  at  the  door 
of  the  tomb. 

Chapter    XLVI  I.      The   Chapter  of  not  letting   be 
carried  away  the  throne  from  a  man  in  the  Underworld. 
This  Chapter  has  no  Vignette  in  the  Theban  Recension. 

Chapter  XLVI  1 1.  [The  Chapter  of  a  man  coming 
forth  against]  his  enemies. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  spearing  a  serpent. 

Chapter    XLIX.*     The  Chapter  of  a   man  coming 
forth  against  his  enemies  in  the  Underworld. 
Vignette  :  Wanting. 

Chapter  L.  The  Chapter  of  not  going  in  to  the 
chamber  of  the  divine  block.  Two  versions  of  this  Chapter 
are  known,  but  only  one  has  a  Vignette. 

Vignette  :  A  man  standing  with  his  back  to  the  block. 

Chapter  LI.  The  Chapter  of  not  being  tripped  up  in 
the  Underworld. 

Vignette  :  A  man  standing  upright. 

Chapter  LI  I.  The  Chapter  of  not  eating  filth  in  the 
Underworld. 

Vignette  :  A  man  seated  before  a  table  of  food  [Saite 
Recension]. 

Chapter  LI  1 1.     The  Chapter  of  not  eating  filth  and 
of  not  drinking  polluted  water  in  the  Underworld. 
Vignette  :  Wanting. 

Chapter  LIV.  The  Chapter  of  giving  air  to  the 
deceased  in  the  Underworld. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  holding  a  sail. 

Chapter  LV.     Another  Chapter  of  giving  air. 
Vignette  :  The  deceased  holding  a  sail  in  each  hand. 

Chapter  LVI.  The  Chapter  of  snuffing  the  air  in  the 
earth. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  holding  a  sail. 

Chapter  LVI  I.  The  Chapter  of  snuffing  the  air  and 
of  gaining  the  mastery  over  the  waters  in  the  Underworld. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  holding  a  sail,  and  standing 
in  a  running  stream. 

D  2 


36  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

Chapter  LVIII.  The  Chapter  of  snuffing  the  air  and 
of  gaining  power  over  the  water  which  is  in  the  Under- 
world. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  drinking  water  in  a  running 
stream. 

Chapter  LIX.  The  Chapter  of  snuffing  the  air  and 
of  gaining  power  over  the  water  which  is  in  the  Under- 
world. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  receiving  meat  and  drink 
from  Nut  or  Hathor. 

Chapter  LX.*     Another  Chapter. 
Vignette  :  The  deceased  holding  a  lotus. 

Chapter  LXI.  The  Chapter  of  not  letting  the  Heart- 
soul  of  a  man  be  taken  from  him. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  clasping  his  Heart-soul. 

Chapter  LXI  I.     The  Chapter  of  drinking  water. 
Vignette  :  The  deceased   scooping  up  water  with  his 
hands. 

Chapter  LXI  I  la.  The  Chapter  of  drinking  water, 
and  of  not  being  burnt  with  fire. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  catching  water  in  a  bowl. 

Chapter  LXI  I  lb.  The  Chapter  of  not  being  boiled 
(or  scalded)  in  the  water. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  seated  before  a  table  of  food. 

Chapter  LXIV.  The  Chapter  of  coming  forth  by 
day  in  the  Underworld.    Two  versions,  each  with  a  Rubric. 

Vignette :  The  deceased  adoring  the  disk,  which 
stands  on  the  top  of  a  tree. 

Chapter  LXV.     [The   Chapter  of]  coming  forth  by 
day,  and  of  gaining  the  mastery  over  foes.      In  two  versions. 
Vignette  :  The  deceased  adoring  Ra. 

Chapter  LXVI.  [The  Chapter  of]  coming  forth  by 
day. 

Vignette  :  Wanting. 

Chapter  LXVI  I.     The  Chapter  of  opening  the  doors 
of  the  Tuat  and  of  Coming  Forth  by  Day. 
Vignette :  Wanting. 


Chapters  of  the  Theban  Recension  37 

Chapter  LXVIII.  The  Chapter  of  Coming  Forth 
by  day.     With  Rubric. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  kneeling  by  the  side  of  a  tree 
before  Hathor. 

Chapter  LXIX.     Another  Chapter. 
Vignette  :  Wanting. 

Chapter  LXX.     Another  Chapter. 
Vignette  :  Wanting. 

Chapter  LXXI.  The  Chapter  of  Coming  Forth  by 
day.     With  Rubric. 

Vignette :  The  deceased  with  both  hands  raised  in 
adoration  kneeling  before  the  goddess  Meh-urt. 

Chapter  LXXI  I.     The  Chapter  of  Coming  Forth  by 
Day  and  of  passing  through  the  Amehet.     With  Rubric. 
Vignette  :  The  deceased  standing  before  his  tomb. 

Chapter  LXXIII.     See  Chapter  IX. 

Chapter  LXXIV.  The  Chapter  of  lifting  up  the  legs 
and  coming  forth  upon  earth. 

Vignette :  The  deceased  kneeling  before  the  Henu 
Boat  of  Seker. 

Chapter  LXXV.  The  Chapter  of  travelling  to  Anu 
(On),  and  of  receiving  a  throne  there. 

Vignette :    The  deceased   standing  before  the  object 

Anu  I  . 

Chapter  LXXVI.     The  Chapter  of  [a  man]  changing 
into  whatsoever  form  he  pleaseth. 
This  Chapter  has  no  Vignette. 

Chapter  LXXVI  I.  The  Chapter  of  changing  into 
a  golden  hawk. 

Vignette  :  A  golden  hawk,    ^  . 

Chapter  LXXVI  1 1.  The  Chapter  of  changing  into 
a  divine  hawk. 

Vignette :  A  hawk,  ^ . 


38  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

Chapter  LXXIX.  The  Chapter  of  being  among  the 
Company  of  the  Gods,  and  of  becoming  a  prince  among  the 
divine  powers. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  adoring  three  gods,  who 
represent  the  Four  Sons  of  Horus. 

Chapter  LXXX.  The  Chapter  of  changing  into  a 
god,  and  of  sending  forth  Hght  into  darkness. 

Vignette  :  A  god,  with  the  solar  disk  on  his  head. 

Chapter  LXXXIa.  The  Chapter  of  changing  into 
a  Hly. 

Vignette :  A  Hly. 

Chapter  LXXXIb.  The  Chapter  of  chancrino-  into 
a  lily. 

Vignette  :  The  head  of  the  deceased  rising  out  of  a 
hly  Y' 

Chapter  LXXXII.  The  Chapter  of  changing  into 
Ptah,  of  eating  cakes,  of  drinking  ale,  of  unloosing  the  body, 
and  of  living  in  Anu  (On). 

Vignette  :  The  god  Ptah  in  a  shrine. 

Chapter  LXXXII  I.  The  Chapter  of  changing  into 
a  Benu  bird. 

Vignette  :  A  Benu  bird  ^S.     With  Rubric. 

Chapter  LXXXIV.  The  Chapter  of  changing  into 
a  heron. 

Vignette :  A  heron. 

Chapter  LXXXV.  The  Chapter  of  changing  into 
the  Soul,  of  not  going  into  the  place  of  punishment :  who- 
soever knoweth  it  will  never  perish. 

Vignette  :  The  Soul-god  in  the  form  of  a  Ram. 

Chapter  LXXXVI.  The  Chapter  of  changing  into  a 
swallow.     With  Rubric. 


Vignette :  A  swallow. 

Chapter  LXXXVI  I. 

serpent  Sa-ta. 
Vignette  :  A  serpent. 


Chapter  LXXXVI  I.     The  Chapter  of  changing  into 
the  serpent  Sa-ta. 


Chapters  of  the  Theban  Recension  39 

Chapter  LXXXVIII.  The  Chapter  of  changing  into 
a  crocodile. 

Vignette  :  A  crocodile. 

Chapter  LXXXIX.  The  Chapter  of  making  the 
Heart-soul  to  be  united  to  its  body.     With  Rubric. 

Vignette  :  The  soul  visiting  the  body,  which  lies  on  a 
bier. 

Chapter  XC.  The  Chapter  of  driving  evil  recollec- 
tions from  a  man. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  addressing  Thoth.  (Saite 
Recension.) 

Chapter  XCI.  The  Chapter  of  not  allowing  the  soul 
of  a  man  to  be  shut  in.     With  Rubric. 

Vignette  :  A  soul  standing  at  the  door  of  the  tomb. 

Chapter  XCI  I.  The  Chapter  of  opening  the  tomb 
to  the  soul  and  shadow  of  a  man,  so  that  he  may  come 
forth  and  may  gain  power  over  his  legs. 

Vignette  :  The  soul  of  the  deceased  flying  through  the 
door  of  the  tomb  to  the  shadow  (?). 

Chapter  XCI  11.  The  Chapter  of  not  sailing  to  the 
east  in  the  Underworld. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  addressing  Her-f-ha-f. 

Chapter  XCIV.  The  Chapter  of  praying  for  an  ink 
jar  and  palette. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  sitting  before  a  stand,  upon 
which  are  an  ink  jar  and  palette. 

Chapter  XCV.     The  Chapter  of  being  near  Thoth. 
Vignette  :    The    deceased    standing    before    Thoth  ; 
variant,  a  goose. 

Chapter  XCVI.     The  Chapter  of  being  near  Thoth, 
and  of  giving  glory  unto  a  man  in  the  Underworld. 
Vignette  :  The  deceased  standing  near  Thoth. 

Chapter  XCVII.     [No  title.] 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  adoring  Ra  in  his  boat. 

Chapter  XCVI  1 1.  The  Chapter  of  bringing  a  boat 
in  heaven. 

Vignette :  wanting. 


40  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

Chapter  XCIX.  The  Chapter  of  bringing  a  boat  in 
the  Underworld. 

Vignette  :  A  boat  with  the  sail  hoisted. 

Chapter  C.  The  Chapter  of  making-  perfect  the  Spirit- 
soul,  and  of  making  it  to  enter  into  the  boat  of  Ra,  together 
with  his  divine  followers.     With  Rubric. 

Vignette  :  A  boat  containing  a  Company  of  Gods. 

Chapter  CI.  [The  Chapter  of  protecting  the  boat  of 
Ra.]     With  Rubric. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  in  the  boat  with  Ra.  (Saite 
Recension.) 

Chapter  CI  I.  The  Chapter  of  going  into  the  boat 
of  Ra. 

Vignette :  The  deceased  in  the  boat  with  Ra. 

Chapter  CI  1 1.  The  Chapter  of  being  in  the  following 
of  Hathor. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  standing  behind  Hathor. 

Chapter  CIV.  The  Chapter  of  sitting  among  the 
great  gods. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  seated  between  two  gods. 

Chapter  CV.     The  Chapter  of  providing  offerings  for 

the  ka  Ji- 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  burning  incense  before  his  ka. 

Chapter    CVI.     The    Chapter    of    giving    sepulchral 
meals  each  day  to  a  man  in  Het-ka-Ptah  (Memphis). 
Vignette  :  An  altar  with  meat  and  drink  offerings. 

Chapter  CVI  I.*  The  Chapter  of  going  into,  and  of 
coming  forth  from,  the  gate  of  the  gods  of  the  west  among 
the  followers  of  the  ood,  and  of  knowing:  the  souls  of 
Amentet. 

Vignette  :  Three  deities  :  Ra,  Sebek,  and  Hathor. 

Chapter  CVI  1 1.  The  Chapter  of  knowing  the  souls 
of  the  West. 

Vignette  :   Three  deities  :    Temu,  Sebek,  and  Hathor. 

Chapter  CIX.  The  Chapter  of  knowing  the  souls  of 
the  East. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  making  adoration  before 
Ra-Heru-khuti. 


Chapters  of  the  Theban  Recension  41 

Chapter  CX.  The  beginning  of  the  Chapters  of  the 
Field  of  Offerings,  and  of  the  Chapters  of  Coming  Forth 
by  Day,  and  of  going  into,  and  of  coming  forth  from,  the 
Underworld,  and  of  attaining  unto  the  Field  of  Reeds,  and 
of  being  in  the  Field  of  Offerings. 

Vignette  :  The  Field  of  Offerings. 

Chapter  CXI.     See  Chapter  CVIII. 

Chapter  CXI  I.  Another  Chapter  of  knowing  the 
souls  of  Pe. 

Vignette  :  Horus,  Kesta,  and  Hapi. 

Chapter  CXI  1 1.  The  Chapter  of  knowing  the  souls 
of  Nekhen. 

Vignette  :   Horus,  Tuamutef,  and  Qebhsenuf 

Chapter  CXIV.  The  Chapter  of  knowing  the  souls 
of  Khemenu  (Hermopolis). 

Vignette  :  Three  ibis-headed  gods. 

Chapter  CXV.  The  Chapter  of  coming  forth  to 
heaven,  of  passing  through  the  hall  of  the  tomb,  and  of 
knowing  the  souls  of  Anu. 

Vignette :  The  deceased  adoring  Ra,  Shu,  and 
Sekhmet. 

Chapter  CXVI.  [The  Chapter  of]  knowing  the  souls 
of  Anu.     With  Rubric. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  adoring  Thoth,  Sau,  and  Tern. 

Chapter  CXVI  I.  The  Chapter  of  taking  a  way  in 
Ra-stau. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased,  holding  a  staff  in  his  hand, 
ascending  the  western  hills. 

Chapter  CXVI  1 1.  The  Chapter  of  coming  forth 
from  Ra-stau. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  holding  a  staff  in  his  left  hand. 

Chapter  CXIX.  The  Chapter  of  knowing  the  name 
of  Osiris,  and  of  going  into,  and  of  coming  forth  from, 
Ra-stau. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  adoring  Osiris,  who  stands 
in  a  shrine. 

Chapter  CXX.     See  Chapter  XII. 

Chapter  CXXI.     See  Chapter  XIII. 


42  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

Chapter  CXXII.  The  Chapter  of  the  deceased  going 
in  after  coming  forth  from  the  Underworld. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  bowing  before  his  tomb, 
which  is  on  a  hill.     (Saite  Recension.) 

Chapter  CXXIII.  The  Chapter  of  going  into  the 
great  house  {i.e.,  tomb). 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  standing  before  a  tomb. 

Chapter  CXXIV.  The  Chapter  of  going  in  to  the 
princes  of  Osiris. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  adoring  Kesta,  Hapi, 
Tuamutef,  and  Oebhsenuf 

Chapter  CXXV.  The  words  which  are  to  be  uttered 
by  the  deceased  when  he  cometh  to  the  hall  of  Maati, 
which  separateth  him  from  his  sins,  and  which  maketh  him 
to  see  God,  the  Lord  of  mankind.      With  Rubric. 

A.  The  Introduction. 

B.  The  Negative  Confession. 

C.  Address  of  the  deceased  after  the  Judgment. 
Vignette  :  The  hall  of  Maati,   in  which  the  heart  of 

the  deceased  is  being  weighed  in  a  balance  in  the  presence 
of  the  great  gods. 

Chapter  CXXVI.     [Without  tide.] 
Vignette  :  A  lake  of  fire,  at  each  corner  of  which  sits 
an  ape. 

Chapter  CXXVI  la.     The  book  of  the  praise  of  the 

gods  of  the   Circles     "^    ^v'~~'- 

Vignette  :  Wanting. 

Chapter  CXXVI  lb.  The  Chapter  of  the  words  to 
be  spoken  on  going  to  the  Chiefs  of  Osiris,  and  of  the  praise 
of  the  gods  who  are  leaders  in  the  TnaL 

Vignette  :  Eight  pairs  of  gods,  with  a  table  of  offerings 
before  each  pair. 

Chapter  CXXVIII.*  The  Chapter  of  praising  Osiris. 
Vignette  :  The  deceased  adoring  three  deities. 

Chapter  CXXIX.     See  Chapter  C. 

Chapter  CXXX.  The  Chapter  of  making  perfect 
the  Si)irit-soul.     With  Rubric. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  standing  between  the  two 
boats  of  the  Sun-god,  the  Maatet  and  the  Sektet. 


Chapters  of  the  Theban  Recension  43 

Chapter  CXXXI.*  The  Chapter  of  having  existence 
nisfh  unto  Ra. 

Vignette  :  Wanting. 

Chapter  CXXXII.  The  Chapter  of  making  a  man 
to  go  about  to  see  his  house  upon  the  earth. 

Vignette  :    A  man  standing  before  a  house  or  tomb. 

Chapter  CXXXII  I.  The  Chapter  of  making  perfect 
the  Spirit-soul  in  the  Underworld  in  the  presence  of  the 
Great  Company  of  the  Gods.     With  Rubric. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  adoring  Ra  who  is  seated  in 
a  boat. 

Chapter  CXXXIV.  The  Chapter  of  entering  into 
the  boat  of  Ra,  and  of  being  among  those  who  are  in  his 
train.     With  Rubric. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  adoring  Shu,  Tefnut,  Keb, 
Nut,  Osiris,  Isis,  Horus,  Hathor. 

Chapter  CXXXV.*     Another  Chapter,   which  is  to 
be  recited  at  the  waxing  of  the  moon  [each]  month. 
This  Chapter  has  no  Vignette. 

Chapter  CXXXVIa.  The  Chapter  of  sailing  in  the 
boat  of  Ra.      In  two  versions  :  the  second  with  Rubric. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  standing  with  hands  raised 
in  adoration. 

Chapter  CXXXVIb.     The  Chapter  of  sailing  in  the 
great  boat  of  Ra,  to  pass  over  the  fiery  path  of  the  sun. 
Vignette  :  The  head  of  Ra  in  a  boat. 

Chapter  CXXXVIIa.  The  Chapter  of  the  four 
blazing  torches  which  are  to  be  lighted  for  the  Khu.  With 
Rubrics. 

Vignette  :  Four  men,  each  holding  a  lighted  torch. 

Chapter  CXXXVIIb.     The  Chapter  of  the  deceased 

kindling  the  fire. 

Vignette  :  The  goddess  Taurt  kindling  a  flame. 

Chapter  CXXXVIII.  The  Chapter  of  making  the 
deceased  to  enter  into  Abydos. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  adoring  the  standard  ^ . 
Chapter  CXXXIX.     See  Chapter  CXXIII. 


44  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

Chapter  CXL.*  The  Book  which  is  to  be  recited  in 
the  second  month  of  the  season  Pert,  when  the  tUchat  is 
full  in  the  second  month  of  Pert.     With  Rubric. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  adoring  Anpu,  the  utchat, 
and  Ra.     (Saite  Recension.) 

Chapters  CXLI-CXLII.  The  Book  which  is  to  be 
recited  by  a  man  for  his  father  and  for  his  son  at  the 
festivals  of  Amentet.  It  will  make  him  perfect  before  Ra 
and  before  the  gods,  and  he  shall  dwell  with  them.  It  shall 
be  recited  on  the  ninth  day  of  the  festival. 

Chapter  CXLIII.  This  is  the  Vignette  of  Chapter 
CXLII. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  making  offerings  before  a  god. 

Chapter  CXLI V.  The  Chapter  of  entering  in.  With 
Rubric. 

Vignette  :  Seven  pylons,  each  guarded  by  a  door- 
keeper, a  watchman,  and  a  herald. 

Chapter  CXLVa.     [Without  tide.] 
This  Chapter  has  no  Vignette. 

Chapter  CXLVb.  [The  Chapter]  of  coming  forth  to 
the  hidden  pylons. 

This  Chapter  has  no  Vignette.  The  Saite  Recension 
contains  many  Vignettes, 

Chapter  CXLVI.  [The  Chapter  of]  knowing  the 
pylons  in  the  House  of  Osiris  in  the  Field  of  Reeds. 

Vignette  :  A  series  of  pylons  guarded  each  by  a  god. 

Chapter  CXLVII.  [A  Chapter]  to  be  recited  by  the 
deceased  when  he  cometh  to  the  first  hall  of  Amentet. 
With  Rubric. 

Vignette  :  A  series  of  doors,  each  guarded  by  a  god. 

Chapter  CXLVI  1 1.  [The  Chapter]  of  nourishing 
the  Khu  in  the  Underworld,  and  of  removing  him  from 
every  evil  thing.     With  Rubric. 

Vignette  :  The  Seven  Cows  and  their  Bull,  and  the 
Four  Rudders  of  Heaven. 

Chapter  CXLIX.     [The  Chapter  of  the  Aats.] 
Vignette  :  The  Aats  of  the  House  of  Osiris. 


Chapters  of  the  Theban  Recension  45 

Chapter  CL.     [Without  title.] 

Vignette  :  The  Aats  of  the  House  of  Osiris  in  tabular 
form. 

Chapter  CLI.     [Without  title.] 
Vignette  :  Scene  of  the  mummy  chamber. 

Chapter  CLIa.  [Chapter]  of  the  hands  of  Anpu,  the 
dweller  in  the  sepulchral  chamber,  being  upon  the  lord  of 
life  {i.e.,  the  mummy). 

Vignette  :  Anubis  standing  by  the  bier  of  the  deceased. 

Chapter  CLIb.  The  Chapter  of  the  chief  of  hidden 
things. 

Vignette  :  A  human  head. 

Chapter  CLI  I.  The  Chapter  of  building  a  house  in 
the  earth. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  laying  the  foundations  of  his 
house. 

Chapter  CLI  I  la.  The  Chapter  of  coming  forth  from 
the  net. 

Vignette  :  A  net  by  the  side  of  which  stands  the 
deceased. 

Chapter  CLI  I  lb.  The  Chapter  of  coming  forth  from 
the  fishing  net. 

Vignette  :  Three  apes  drawing  a  fishing  net. 

Chapter  CLIV.  The  Chapter  of  not  allowing  the 
body  of  a  man  to  decay  in  the  tomb. 

Vignette  :  The  sun  shining  on  the  body  of  the  deceased. 
(Saite  Recension.) 

Chapter  CLV.  The  Chapter  of  a  Tet  of  gold  to  be 
placed  on  the  neck  of  the  Kku.     With  Rubric. 

Vignette  :  A  Tet  u,  i.e.,  the  sacrum  bone  of  Osiris. 

Chapter  CLVI.  The  Chapter  of  a  Tet  of  amethyst 
to  be  placed  on  the  neck  of  the  Kku.     With  Rubric. 

Vignette  :  A  Tet  X,  i.e.,  the  uterus  and  vagina  of  Isis. 

Chapter  CLVI  I.*     The  Chapter  of  a  vulture  of  gold 
to  be  placed  on  the  neck  of  the  Kku.     With  Rubric. 
Vignette  :  A  vulture. 


46  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

Chapter  CLVIIL*     The  Chapter  of  a  collar  of  gold 
to  be  placed  on  the  neck  of  the  Khu.     With  Rubric. 
Vignette  :  A  collar. 

Chapter  CLIX.*  The  Chapter  of  a  sceptre  of  mother- 
of-emerald  to  be  placed  on  the  neck  of  the  Khu.  With 
Rubric. 

Vignette  :  A  sceptre  |. 

Chapter  CLX.  [The  Chapter]  of  placing  a  plaque  of 
mother-of-emerald. 

Vignette  :  Thoth  giving  a  plaque  to  the  deceased. 

Chapter  CLXI.  The  Chapter  of  the  opening  of  the 
doors  of  heaven  by  Thoth,  etc.     With  Rubric. 

Vignette  :  Thoth  opening  the  four  doors  of  heaven. 

Chapter  CLXIL*  The  Chapter  of  causing  heat  to 
exist  under  the  head  of  the  Khu.     With  Rubric. 

Vignette  :  A  cow,  with  a  pair  of  plumes  and  a  disk 
between  her  horns. 

Chapter  CLXIII.*  The  Chapter  of  not  allowing  the 
body  of  a  man  to  decay  in  the  Underworld.     With  Rubric. 

Vignette  :  Two  utchats  and  a  serpent,  each  on  a  pair 
of  human  legs. 

Chapter  CLXIV.*    Another  Chapter.    With  Rubric. 
Vignette  :  A  three-headed  goddess,  winged,  standing 
between  two  pigmies. 

Chapter  CLXV.*  The  Chapter  of  arriving  in  port, 
of  not  becoming  unseen,  and  of  making  the  body  to  ger- 
minate, and  of  satisfying  it  with  the  water  of  heaven. 
With  Rubric. 

Vignette  :  The  god  Menu  with  a  beetle's  body,  and  a 
man  with  a  ram's  head  on  each  shoulder. 

Chapter  CLXVI.     The  Chapter  of  the  pillow. 
Vignette  :  A  pillow  or  head-rest. 

Chapter  CLXVI  I.  The  Chapter  of  bringing  the 
utchat. 

Vignette  :  An  utchat  resting  on  fss?^. 

Chapter  CLXVIIIa.     [Without  tide.] 
Vignette  :  The  boats  of  the  sun,  etc. 


Chapters  of  the  Theban  Recension  47 

Chapter  CLXVIIIb.     [Without  title.] 
Vignette  :   Men  pouring  libations,  gods,  etc. 

Chapter  CLXIX.  The  Chapter  of  setting  up  the 
funerary  chamber. 

Vignette  :  Wanting. 

Chapter  CLXX.  The  Chapter  of  arranging  the 
funerary  chamber. 

Vignette  :  Wanting. 

Chapter  CLXXI.  The  Chapter  of  tying  on  the 
garment  of  purity. 

Vignette  :  Wanting. 

Chapter  CLXXII.      Here  begin  the  Chapters  of  the 
praises  which  are  to  be  recited  in  the  Underworld. 
Vignette  :  Wanting. 

Chapter  CLXXIII.  Addresses  by  Horus  to  his 
father. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  adoring  Osiris. 

Chapter  CLXXIV.  The  Chapter  of  causing  the  Khu 
to  come  forth  from  the  great  gate  of  heaven. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  coming  forth  from  a  door. 

Chapter  CLXXV.  The  Chapter  of  not  dying  a 
second  time  in  the  Underworld. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  adoring  Thoth. 

Chapter  CLXXVI.     The  Chapter  of  not   dying   a 
second  time  in  the  Underworld.     With  Rubric. 
Vignette  :  Wanting. 

Chapter  CLXXVI  I.     The  Chapter  of  raising  up  the 
Khu,  and  of  making-  the  soul  to  live  in  the  Underworld. 
Vignette  :  The  deceased  receiving  offerings. 

Chapter  CLXXVI  1 1.  The  Chapter  of  raising  up  the 
body,  of  making  the  eyes  to  see,  of  making  the  ears  to  hear, 
of  setting  firm  the  head  and  of  giving  it  its  powers. 

Vignette  :  Wanting. 

Chapter  CLXXIX.  The  Chapter  of  coming  forth 
from  yesterday,  of  Coming  Forth  by  Day,  and  of  praying 
with  the  hands. 

Vignette :  Wanting. 


48  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

Chapter  CLXXX.  The  Chapter  of  Coming  Forth 
by  Day,  of  praising  Ra  in  Amentet,  and  of  ascribing  praise 
unto  those  who  are  in  the  Tuat. 

Vignette :  The  deceased  adoring  Ra  and  two  other 
gods. 

Chapter  CLXXXI.  The  Chapter  of  going  in  to  the 
divine  Chiefs  of  Osiris  who  are  the  leaders  in  the  Tuat. 
With  Rubric. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  adoring  Osiris,  etc. 

Chapter  CLXXXII.  The  Book  of  stablishing  the 
backbone  of  Osiris,  of  giving  breath  to  him  whose  heart  is 
still,  and  of  repulsing  the  enemies  of  Osiris  by  Thoth. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  lying  on  a  bier  in  a  funeral 
chest,  surrounded  by  various  gods. 

Chapter  CLXXXIII.  A  hymn  of  praise  to  Osiris; 
ascribing  to  him  glory,  and  to  Un-nefer  adoration. 

Vignettes  :  The  deceased,  with  hands  raised  in  adora- 
tion, and  the  god  Thoth. 

Chapter  CLXXXIV.  The  Chapter  of  being  with 
Osiris. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  standing  by  the  side  of  Osiris. 

Chapter  CLXXXV.  The  ascription  of  praise  to 
Osiris,  and  of  adoration  to  the  everlasting  lord. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  making  adoration  to  Osiris. 

Chapter  CLXXXVI.  A  hymn  of  praise  to  Hathor, 
mistress  of  Amentet,  and  to  Meh-urt. 

Vignette  :  The  deceased  approaching  the  mountain  of 
the  dead,  from  which  appears  the  goddess  Hathor. 

Chapter  CLXXXVI  I.     The  Chapter  of  entering  into 
the  Company  of  the  Gods. 
Vignette :  Wanting. 

Chapter  CLXXXVI  1 1.     The  Chapter  of  building  a 
house,  and  of  appearing  in  a  human  form. 
Vignette :  Wanting. 

Chapter  CLXXXIX.  The  Chapter  of  not  letting  a 
man  suffer  hunger. 

Vignette  :  Wanting. 


The  Greenfield  Papyrus  49 

Chapter  CXC.  The  Book  of  making  perfect  the  Khu. 
With  Rubric. 

Vignette  :  Wanting, 

In  the  papyri  containing  the  Theban  Recension  which 
are  written  in  the  hieratic  character,  the  Rubrics,  catchwords, 
and  certain  accursed  names,  Hke  that  of  Aapep,  are  in  red. 
The  vignettes  are  roughly  traced  in  black  outline,  and  are 
without  ornament ;  but  at  the  right-hand  ends  of  the  best 
papyri  painted  scenes,  in  which  the  deceased  is  depicted 
making  adoration  to  Ra  or  Horus,  are  frequently  found. 
The  names  and  titles  of  the  deceased  are  written  in  perpen- 
dicular rows  of  hieroglyphs.  The  finest  example  of  this 
class  of  papyri  is  the  Papyrus  of  Nesitanebtashru  (the 
Greenfield  Papyrus)  in  the  British  Museum  (No.  10554). 
Before  opening,  this  papyrus  formed  a  compact  roll  about 
I  foot  8|-  inches  in  length,  which  was  flatter  at  one  end 
than  the  other.  With  the  exception  of  a  few  hieroglyphs 
at  the  beginning  of  the  papyrus,  and  portions  of  the  figures 
of  Osiris  and  the  deceased,  the  document  is  complete,  and 
text  and  Vignettes  are  in  a  remarkable  state  of  preservation. 
The  papyrus  is  nearly  123  feet  long  and  i  foot  6|-  inches 
wide  ;  it  contains  2,666  lines  of  text,  hieratic  chiefly, 
arranged  in  172  columns.  The  papyrus  is  the  longest  of 
the  Theban  codices  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead,  and  with  the 
exception  of  the  great  Harris  Papyrus,  which  measures 
133  feet  by  i  foot  \\  inches,  is  the  longest  papyrus  known. 
All  the  texts  are  written  in  black  ink,  the  titles  of  the 
Chapters,  the  Rubrics,  catchwords,  etc,  being  in  red  ;  the 
fine  long  series  of  Vignettes  are  drawn  in  black  outline 
throughout.  The  artistic  work  is  of  a  very  high  character, 
and  is  probably  the  best  example  extant  of  line  drawing 
under  the  New  Empire,  The  papyrus  is  written  chiefiy  in 
hieratic,  a  script  which  is  both  written  and  read  from  right 
to  left,  and  therefore  begins  at  the  right-hand  end  of  the 
papyrus.  The  so-called  "  Negative  Confession  "  appears  in 
it  in  two  copies,  one  in  hieratic,  and  the  other  in  hieroglyphs. 
The  papyrus  was  written  in  the  second  quarter  of  the  tenth 
century  before  Christ,  and  is  for  all  practical  purposes  a 
dated  document.  Its  authority  for  deciding  questions  con- 
cerning hieratic  palaeography  under  the  New  Empire  is 
very   great.       It    contains    eighty-seven    Chapters    of    the 

VOL,  I.  E 


50  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

Theban  Recension  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead.  A  facsimile 
of  the  papyrus,  with  a  description  of  its  contents,  list  of 
Chapters,  etc.,  has  been  recently  published  by  the  Trustees 
of  the  British  Museum.^  Other  fine  examples  of  the 
hieratic  and  hieroglyphic  papyri  of  this  period  are  the 
copies  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead  which  were  written  for 
Maat-ka-Ra  and  Nesi-Khensu,  and  which  have  been 
recently  published  with  a  luminous  introduction  by  Professor 
Naville.^  The  character  of  the  handwriting-  chancres  in 
different  periods,  but  within  a  hundred  years,  apparently, 
the  fine  flowing  style  disappears,  and  the  writing  becomes 
much  smaller  and  is  somewhat  cramped  ;  the  process  of 
reduction  in  size  continues  until  the  XXVIth  dynasty, 
about  600  B.C.,  when  the  small  and  coarsely  written  charac- 
ters are  frequently  difficult  to  decipher.  The  papyri  upon 
which  such  texts  are  written  vary  in  length  from  3  to 
about  1 20  feet,  and  in  width  from  9  to  1 8  inches  ;  as  we 
approach  the  period  of  the  XXVIth  dynasty  the  texture 
becomes  coarser  and  the  material  is  darker  in  colour.  The 
Theban  papyri  of  this  period  are  lighter  in  colour  than 
those  found  in  the  North  of  Egypt  and  are  less  brittle  ; 
they  certainly  suffer  less  in  unrolling. 

The  Saite  Recension  was  in  vogue  from  the  period 
of  the  XXVIth  dynasty,  about  600  B.C.,  to  probably  the  end 
of  the  rule   of  the    Ptolemies   over   Egypt,  about   30  B.C.. 

^  The  Greenfield  Papyrus  in  the  British  Afuseum,  with  Introduction  and 
Descriptioti  by  E.  A.  Wallis  Budge,  London,  191 2. 

"  Papyrus  Funeraires  de  la  XXP  Dynastie,  Paris,  191 2,  large  4to. 
Professor  Naville  is  about  to  publish  the  text  of  the  contract  between 
Amen-Ra  and  Nesi-Khensu,  of  which  a  transcript  and  translation  were 
given  by  Professor  Maspero  in  his  Momies  Poyales,  pp.  600  ff.  The  text  of 
this  remarkable  document  is  divided  into  paragraphs,  which  contain  neither 
prayers  nor  hymns  but  a  veritable  contract  between  the  god  Amen-Ra 
and  the  princess  Nesi-Khensu.  After  the  list  of  the  names  and  titles  of 
Amen-Ra  with  which  it  begins  follow  eleven  sections,  wherein  the  god 

declares  in  legal  phraseology  that  he  hath  deified  the  princess  (  (J  ^  rvf  H 

n  f    ^    zIZ^     ^  I  ^k    J\  j    in   Amenta   and   in    Khert-Neter ; 

that  he  hath  deified  her  soul  and  her  body  in  order  that  neither  may  be 
destroyed  ;  that  he  hath  made  her  divine  like  every  god  and  goddess ;  and 
that  he  hath  decreed  that  whatever  is  necessary  for  her  in  her  new  existence 
shall  be  done  for  her,  even  as  it  is  done  for  every  other  god  and  goddess. 
For  an  English  translation  see  my  Chapters  of  Cof?iing  Forth  by  Day, 
Second  Edition,  Vol.  Ill,  London,  1909. 


The  Saite  Recension  51 

The  Chapters  have  a  fixed  and  definite  order,  and  it  seems 
that  a  careful  revision  of  the  whole  work  was  carried  out, 
and  that  several  alterations  of  an  important  nature  were 
made  in  it.  A  number  of  Chapters  which  are  not  found 
in  older  papyri  appear  durinor  this  period  ;  but  these  are  not 
necessarily  new  inventions,  for  as  the  kings  of  the  XXV I  th 
dynasty  are  renowned  for  having  revived  the  arts  and 
sciences  and  literature  of  the  earliest  dynasties,  it  is  quite 
possible  that  many  or  most  of  the  additional  Chapters  are 
nothing  more  than  new  editions  of  extracts  from  older 
works.  Many  copies  of  this  Recension  were  written  by 
scribes  who  did  not  understand  what  they  were  copying, 
and  omissions  of  signs,  words,  and  even  whole  passages  are 
very  common.  In  papyri  of  the  Ptolemaic  Period  it  is 
impossible  to  read  many  passages  without  the  help  of  texts 
of  earlier  periods.  The  papyri  of  this  period  vary  in  colour 
from  a  light  to  a  dark  brown,  and  consist  usually  of  layers 
composed  of  strips  of  the  plant  measuring  about  2  inches 
in  width  and  14^  to  16  inches  in  length.  Fine  examples 
of  Books  of  the  Dead  of  this  Recension  vary  in  length  from 
about  24I-  feet  (Brit.  Mus.  No.  10479,  written  for  the  utcheb 

Heru,  the  son  of  the  titcheb  Tchehra  A7^  "^^      AX  ^T)^  ) 

to  60  feet.  Hieroglyphic  texts  are  written  in  black,  in 
perpendicular  rows  between  rules,  and  hieratic  texts  in 
horizontal  lines  ;  both  the  hieroglyphs  and  the  hieratic 
characters  lack  the  boldness  of  the  writing  of  the  Theban 
Period,  and  exhibit  the  characteristics  of  an  untrained 
hand.  The  titles  of  the  Chapters,  catchwords,  the  words 
""Y^  which  introduce  a  variant  reading,  etc.,  are  sometimes 
written  in  red.  The  Vignettes  are  usually  traced  in  black 
outline,  and  form  a  kind  of  continuous  border  above  the 
text.  In  good  papyri,  however,  the  scene  forming  the 
XVIth  Chapter,  the  scene  of  the  Fields  of  Peace  (Chapter 
CX),  the  Judgment  scene  (Chapter  CXXV),  the  Vignette 
of  Chapter  CXLVIII,  the  scene  forming  Chapter  CLI  (the 
sepulchral  chamber),  and  the  Vignette  of  Chapter  CLXI,  fill 
the  whole  width  of  the  inscribed  portion  of  the  papyrus,  and 
are  painted  in  somewhat  crude  colours.  In  some  papyri  the 
disk  on  the  head  of  the  hawk  of  Horus  is  covered  with  gold 
leaf,  instead  of  being  painted  red  as  is  usual  in  older  papyri. 
In  the  Graeco- Roman  period  both  texts  and  Vignettes  are 

E  2 


52  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

very  carelessly  executed,  and  it  is  evident  that  they  were 
written  and  drawn  by  ignorant  workmen  in  the  quickest 
and  most  careless  way  possible.  In  this  period  also  certain 
passages  of  the  text  were  copied  in  hieratic  and  demotic 
upon  small  pieces  of  papyri  which  were  buried  with  portions 
of  the  bodies  of  the  dead,  and  upon  narrow  bandages  of 
coarse  linen  in  which  they  were  swathed.^ 

THE   LEGEND   OF  OSIRIS 

The  essential  beliefs  of  the  Egyptian  religion  remained 
unchanged  from  the  earliest  dynasties  down  to  the  period 
when  the  Egyptians  embraced  Christianity,  after  the 
preaching  of  St.  Mark  the  Evangelist  in  Alexandria,  a.d.  69, 
so  firmly  had  the  early  beliefs  taken  possession  of  the 
Egyptian  mind.  And  the  Christians  in  Egypt,  or  Copts  as 
they  are  commonly  called,  the  racial  descendants  of  the 
ancient  Egyptians,  seem  never  to  have  succeeded  in  divesting 
themselves  of  the  superstitious  and  weird  mythological  con- 
ceptions which  they  inherited  from  their  heathen  ancestors. 
It  is  not  necessary  here  to  repeat  the  proofs  of  this  fact,  or 
to  adduce  evidence  extant  in  the  lives  of  the  saints,  martyrs, 
and  ascetics.  It  is  sufficient  to  note,  in  passing,  that  the 
translators  of  the  New  Testament  into  Coptic  rendered  the 
Greek  aSr)^  by  ^.JULertT.^  A^nenti,  the  name  which  the 
ancient  Egyptians  gave  to  the  abode  of  man  after  death,^ 
and  that  the  Copts  peopled  it  with  beings  whose  prototypes 
are  found  on  the  ancient  monuments. 

The  chief  gods  mentioned  in  the  Pyramid  Texts  are 
identical  with  those  whose  names  are  given  on  tomb,  coffin, 
and  papyrus  in  the  latest  dynasties  ;  and  if  the  names  of  the 
great  cosmic  gods,  such  as  Ptah  and  Khnemu,  are  of  rare 
occurrence,  this  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the  crods  of  the  dead 
must  naturally  occupy  the  chief  place  in  this  literature 
which  concerns  the  dead.     Furthermore,  we  find  that  the 

^  Texts  and  translations  of  the  principal  compositions  which  took  the 
place  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead  in  the  Ptolemaic  and  Roman  Periods  will 
be  found  in  my  Chapters  of  Coining  Forth  by  Day  (Vol.  Ill  of  text  and 
Vol.  Ill  of  translation),  Second  Edition,  London,  1909. 

^  See  St.  Matthew  xi,  23  ;  Acts  ii,  27,  etc. 


The  Birth  of  Osiris  53 

doctrine  of  eternal  life  and  of  the  resurrection  of  a  Spirit- 
body  based  upon  the  ancient  story  of  the  resurrection  of 
Osiris  after  a  cruel  death  and  horrible  mutilation,  inflicted 
by  the  Power  of  Evil,  was  the  same  in  all  periods,  and  that 
the  descriptions  of  the  incidents  of  the  death,  mutilation, 
resurrection,  and  judgment  of  Osiris  which  were  written 
in  early  dynastic  times,  were  accepted  without  material 
alteration  or  addition  by  the  priests  and  people  of  all 
periods. 

The  story  of  Osiris  is  nowhere  found  in  a  connected 
form  in  Egyptian  literature,  but  everywhere,  and  in  texts 
of  all  periods,  the  life,  sufferings,  death,  and  resurrection  of 
Osiris  are  accepted  as  facts  universally  admitted,  Greek 
writers  have  preserved  in  their  works  traditions  concerning 
this  god,  and  to  Plutarch  ^  in  particular  we  owe  an  Important 
version  of  the  legend  which  was  current  in  his  day.  It  is 
clear  that  in  some  points  he  errs,  but  this  was  excusable  in 
dealing  with  a  series  of  traditions  already  some  four 
thousand  years  old.  According  to  this  writer  the  goddess 
Rhea  [Nut],  the  wife  of  Helios  [Ra],  was  beloved  by 
Kronos  [Keb].  When  Helios  discovered  the  intrigue,  he 
cursed  his  wife  and  declared  that  she  should  not  be  deHvered 
of  her  child  in  any  month  or  In  any  year.  Then  the  god 
Hermes,  who  also  loved  Rhea,  played  at  tables  with  Selene 
and  won  from  her  the  seventieth  part  of  each  day  of  the 
year,  which,  added  together,  made  five  whole  days.  These 
he  joined  to  the  three  hundred  and  sixty  days  of  which  the 
year  then  consisted.^  Upon  the  first  of  these  five  days  was 
Osiris  brought  forth  ;  ^  and  at  the  moment  of  his  birth  a 
voice  was  heard  to  proclaim  that  the  lord  of  creation  was 
born.  In  course  of  time  he  became  king  of  Egypt,  and 
devoted  himself  to  civilizing  his  subjects  and  to  teaching 

^  For  the  text  see  De  Iside  et  Osiride,  ed.  Didot  (Scripta  Moralia, 
t.  Ill,  pp.  429-69),  §§  XII  ff. 

2  The  days  are  called  in  hieroglyphs  ^     \\  ^        \      ,    "the 

^  ^^^        mil  <^=>Jr  (E  111   I    I 

five  additional  days  of  the  year,"  eTra^foftcvai  yfiepai  vrevTe  ;  see  Brugsch, 
Thesaurus  Inscriptionum  Aegyptiacarum^  Abt.  II  {Kakndarische  Inschriften), 
Leipzig,  1883,  pp.  479,  480;  'brugsch,  Aegypiologie,  p.  361;  Chabas,  Zf 
Calendrier,  Paris  (no  date),  pp.  99  ff. 

^  Osiris  was  born  on  the  first  day,  Horus  on  the  second,  Set  on  the 
third,  Isis  on  the  fourth,  and  Nephthys  on  the  fifth ;  the  first,  third,  and 
fifth  of  these  days  were  considered  unlucky  by  the  Egyptians. 


54  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

them  the  craft  of  the  husbandman  ;  he  estabHshed  a  code 
of  laws  and  bade  men  worship  the  gods.  Having  made 
Egypt  peaceful  and  flourishing,  he  set  out  to  instruct  the 
other  nations  of  the  world.  During  his  absence  his  wife 
I  sis  so  well  ruled  the  state  that  Typhon  [Set],  the  evil  one, 
could  do  no  harm  to  the  realm  of  Osiris.  When  Osiris 
came  again,  Typhon  plotted  with  seventy-two  comrades,  and 
with  Aso,  the  queen  of  Ethiopia,  to  slay  him  ;  and  secretly 
got  the  measure  of  the  body  of  Osiris,  and  made  ready  a 
fair  chest,  which  was  brought  into  his  banqueting  hall  when 
Osiris  was  present  together  with  other  guests.  By  a  ruse 
Osiris  was  induced  to  lie  down  in  the  chest,  which  was 
immediately  closed  by  Typhon  and  his  fellow  conspirators, 
who  conveyed  it  to  the  Tanaitic  mouth  of  the  Nile.^  These 
things  happened  on  the  seventeenth  day  of  the  month 
Hathor,'^  when  Osiris  was  in  the  twenty-eighth  year  either 
of  his  reign  or  of  his  age.  The  first  to  know  of  what  had 
happened  were  the  Pans  and  Satyrs,  who  dwelt  hard  by 
Panopolis  :  and  finally  the  news  was  brought  to  I  sis  at 
Coptos,  whereupon  she  cut  off  a  lock  of  hair  ^  and  put  on 
mourning  apparel.  She  then  set  out  in  deep  grief  to  find 
her  husband's  body,  and  in  the  course  of  her  wanderings 
she  discovered  that  Osiris  had  been  united  with  her  sister 
Nephthys,  and  that  Anubis,  the  offspring  of  the  union,  had 
been  exposed  by  his  mother  as  soon  as  born.  I  sis  tracked 
him  by  the  help  of  dogs,  and  bred  him  up  to  be  her  guard 
and  attendant.  Soon  after  she  learned  that  the  chest  had 
been  carried  by  the  sea  to  Byblos,  where  it  had  been  gently 

^  The  mouths  of  the  Nile  are  discussed  and  described  by  Strabo, 
XVII,  i,  1 8  (ed.  Didot,  p.  68i);  and  by  Diodorus,  I,  33,  7  (ed.  Didot, 
p.  26). 

-  In  the  Calendar  in  the  Fourth  Sallier  Papyrus  (No.  10184)  this  day  is 

marked  triply  unlucky  Y  Y  Y ,  and  it  is  said  that  great   lamentation  by 

Isis  and  Nephthys  took  place  for  Un-nefcr  (Osiris)  thereon.  See  Chabas, 
Le  Calendrier,  p.  50.  Here  we  have  Plutarch's  statement  supported  by 
documentary  evidence.  Some  very  interesting  details  concerning  the 
festivals  of  Osiris  in  the  month  Choiak  are  given  by  Loret  in  Kecneil  de 
Travaux,  t.  Ill,  pp.  43. ff;  t.  IV,  pp.  21  ff.;  and  t.  V,  pp.  85  i{.  The  various 
mysteries  which  took  place  thereat  are  minutely  described. 

^  On  the  cutting  of  the  hair  as  a  sign  of  mourning,  see  W.  Robertson 
Smith,  T/ie  Religmi  of  the  Setnites,  p.  395  ;  and  for  other  beliefs  about  the 
hair  see  Tylor,  Primitive  Culture,  Vol.  II,  p.  364,  and  Fra/.er,  Golden 
Bough,  pp.  193-208. 


The  Murder  of  Osiris  55 

laid  by  the  waves  among  the  branches  of  a  tamarisk  tree 
(ipeiKrj  TLul),  which  in  a  very  short  time  had  grown  to  a 
maofnificent  size  and  had  enclosed  the  chest  within  its  trunk. 
The  king  of  the  country,  admiring  the  tree,  cut  it  down  and 
made  a  pillar  for  the  roof  of  his  house  of  that  part  which 
contained  the  body  of  Osiris.  When  I  sis  heard  of  this  she 
went  to  Byblos,  and,  gaining  admittance  to  the  palace 
through  the  report  of  the  royal  maidens,  she  was  made 
nurse  to  one  of  the  king's  sons.  Instead  of  nursing  the 
child  in  the  ordinary  way,  I  sis  gave  him  her  finger  to  suck, 
and  each  night  she  put  him  into  the  fire  to  consume  his 
mortal  parts,  changing  herself  the  while  into  a  swallow  and 
bemoaning  her  fate.  But  the  queen  once  happened  to  see 
her  son  in  fiames,  and  cried  out,  and  thus  deprived  him  of 
immortality.  Then  I  sis  told  the  queen  her  story,  and 
begged  for  the  pillar  which  supported  the  roof  This  she 
cut  open,  and  took  out  the  chest  and  her  husband's  body,^ 
and  her  lamentations  were  so  terrible  that  one  of  the  royal 
children  died  of  fright.  She  then  brought  the  chest  by  ship 
to  Egypt,  where  she  opened  it  and  embraced  the  body  of 
her  husband,  weeping  bitterly.  Then  she  sought  her  son 
Horus  in  Buto,  in  Lower  Egypt,  first  having  hidden  the 
chest  in  a  secret  place.  But  Typhon,  one  night  hunting 
by  the  light  of  the  moon,  found  the  chest,  and,  recognizing 
the  body,  tore  it  into  fourteen  pieces,  which  he  scattered  up 
and  down  throughout  the  land.  When  I  sis  heard  of  this 
she  took  a  boat  made  of  papyrus- — a  plant  abhorred  by 
crocodiles — and  sailing  about  she  collected  the  fragments 
of   Osiris's    body.'^     Wherever  she    found    one,   there    she 

^  The  story  continues  that  Isis  then  wrapped  the  pillar  in  fine  linen  and 
anointed  it  with  oil,  and  restored  it  to  the  queen.  Plutarch  adds  that  the 
piece  of  wood  is,  to  this  day,  preserved  in  the  temple  of  Isis,  and  worshipped 
by  the  people  of  Byblos.  Prof.  Robertson  Smith  suggests  {Religion  of  the 
Semites^  p.  175)  that  the  rite  of  draping  and  anointing  a  sacred  stump 
supplies  the  answer  to  the  unsolved  question  of  the  nature  of  the  ritual 
practices  connected  with  the  Ashera.  That  some  sort  of  drapery  belonged 
to  the  Ashera  is  clear  from  2  Kings  xxiii,  7.  See  also  Tylor,  Primitive 
Culture,  Vol.  II,  p.  150;  and  Frazer,  Golden  Bough,\o\.  I,  pp.  304  ff.;  see 
also  Mr.  Frazer's  latest  work  on  the  Osiris  legends,  Adonis,  Aitis,  and 
Osiris,  London,  1907. 

2  The  ark  of  "  bulrushes  "  was,  no  doubt,  intended  to  preserve  the  child 
Moses  from  crocodiles. 

Moi'ov  Sc  Twv  yu.epoJi;  tov    OcrtptSo?  ttjv  ^Icrtv   ov^^   evpctc  to   alootov  €vOv^ 
yap  €is  Tov  TTOTafxov  f)ic}>rjvai,  Koi  yivcratrOai  t6u  T€  ActtiSwtov   avTov  kol  tov 


56  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

built  a  tomb.  But  now  Horus  had  grown  up,  and  being 
encouraged  to  the  use  of  arms  by  Osiris,  who  returned 
from  the  Other  World,  he  went  out  to  do  battle  with  Typhon, 
the  murderer  of  his  father.  The  fight  lasted  many  days, 
and  Typhon  was  made  captive.  But  I  sis,  to  whom  the 
care  of  the  prisoner  was  given,  so  far  from  aiding  her  son 
Horus,  set  Typhon  at  liberty.  Horus  in  his  rage  tore  from 
her  head  the  royal  diadem  ;  but  Thoth  gave  her  a  helmet 
in  the  shape  of  a  cow's  head.  In  two  other  battles  fought 
between  Horus  and  Typhon,  Horus  was  the  victor.^ 

This  is  the  story  of  the  sufferings  and  death  of  Osiris  as 
told  by  Plutarch.  Osiris  was  the  God-man  through  whose 
sufferings  and  death  the  Egyptian  hoped  that  he  might 
rise  again  in  a  glorified  Spirit-body,  and  to  him  who  had 
conquered  death  and  had  become  the  king  of  the  Other 
World  the  Egyptian  appealed  in  prayer  for  eternal  life 
through  his  victory  and  power.  In  every  funeral  inscription 
known  to  us,  from  the  Pyramid  Texts  down  to  the  roughly- 
written  prayers  upon  coffins  of  the  Roman  period,  what  is 
done  for  Osiris  is  done  also  for  the  deceased,  the  state 
and  condition  of  Osiris  are  the  state  and  condition  of  the 
deceased  ;  in  a  word  the  deceased  is  identified  with  Osiris. 
If  Osiris  liveth  for  ever,  the  deceased  will  live  for  ever ;  if 
Osiris  dieth,  then  will  the  deceased  perish. 

The    oldest   of  the    sources  of  our  information   about 


<j>dypov  Koi  Tov  o^vpvyxov.  k.t.X.     By  the  festival  celebrated  by  the  Egyptians 
in  honour  of  Osiris,  we  are  probably  to  understand  the  public  performance 

of  the  ceremony  of  "setting  up  the  Tet  in  Tetu  "   — m —  -  f  ^  A  u    |  / 

§n  ©,   which  we  know  took  place   on  the  last  day  of  the  month 

Ji  (^  ^  . 

Choiak ;    see    Loret,   Les   Fetes  d' Osiris   au  mois  de  Khoiak  {Recueil  de 
Travaux,  t.  IV,  p.  32,  §  87)  ;  Plutarch,  De  Iside,  %  XVIII. 

1  An  account  of  the  battle  is  also  given  in  the  IVth  Sallier  Papyrus, 
wherein  we  are  told  that  it  took  place  on  the  26th  day  of  the  month  'J'hoth. 
Horus  and  Set  fought  in  the  form  of  two  men,  but  they  afterwards  changed 
themselves  into  two  bears,  and  they  passed  three  days  and  three  nights  in 
this  form.  Victory  inclined  now  to  one  side,  and  now  to  the  other,  and  the 
heart  of  Isis  suffered  bitterly.  When  Horus  saw  that  she  loosed  the  fetters 
which  he  had  laid  upon  Set,  he  became  like  a  "  raging  panther  of  the  south 
with  fury,"  and  she  fled  before  him  ;  but  he  pursued  her,  and  cut  off  her 
head,  which  Thoth  transformed  by  his  words  of  magical  power  and  set 
upon  her  body  again  in  the  form  of  that  of  a  cow.  In  the  calendars  the 
26th  day  of  Thoth  was  marked  triply  deadly  Q^Q^Q^!!-  ^ee  Chabas, 
Le  Calendrier,  pp.  28  ff. 


The  Lamentations  of  I  sis  57 

Osiris  is  the  Pyramid  Texts,  and  a  careful  examination  of 
these  proves  that  nearly  all  the  statements  made  by  classical 
writers  about  the  murder  and  mutilation  of  Osiris  are 
substantially  correct.  All  the  important  passages  in  the 
Pyramid  Texts  which  illustrate  the  Legend  of  Osiris  are 
given  with  English  renderings  in  my  Osiris  and  the 
Egyptian  Resurrection,  London,  191 1,  and  it  is  therefore 
unnecessary  to  repeat  them  here. 

In  the  XVII Ith,  or  early  in  the  XlXth  dynasty, 
we  find  Osiris  called  "the  king  of  eternity,  the  lord  of 
"  everlastingness,  who  traverseth  millions  of  years  in  the 
"  duration  of  his  life,  the  firstborn  son  of  the  womb  of  Nut, 
"  begotten  of  Keb,  the  prince  of  gods  and  men,  the  god  of 
**  gods,  the  king  of  kings,  the  lord  of  lords,  the  prince  of 
"  princes,  the  governor  of  the  world,  from  the  womb  of 
"  Nut,  whose  existence  is  for  everlasting,^  Unnefer  of  many 
"  forms  and  of  many  attributes,  Temu  in  Anu,  the  lord  of 
"  Akert,^  the  only  one,  the  lord  of  the  land  on  each  side 
"  of  the  celestial  Nile."^ 

In  the  XXV Ith  dynasty  and  later  there  grew  up  a  class 
of  literature  represented  by  such  works  as  "  The  Book  of 
Breathings,"'^  "  The  Lamentations  of  Isis  and  Nephthys,"^ 
"  The    Festival    Songs    of    Isis    and    Nephthys,"^    "  The 

1  For  the  text  see  the  Papyrus  of  Ani,  Plate  II,  and  Plate  XXXVI,  1.  2. 

2  I.e.,  the  Underworld. 

^37  P=^       neb  dtebui ;  see  Ani,  Plate  XIX,  1.  9. 

4  cEzi  nn  — H »—  O  -r^.^  I        ,  ,  ,  .  , 

M  W  <=>^  /vw/vs  )     )  I .      A  text  of  this  work,  tran- 

scribed  into  hieroglyphs,  was  published,  with  a  Latin  translation,  by 
Brugsch,  under  the  title,  Sai  ati  Sinsin  sive  liber  Metempsychosis  veterum 
Aegyptiorum,  Berlin,  1851  ;  and  an  English  translation  of  the  same  work, 
but  made  from  a  Paris  MS.,  was  given  by  P.  J.  de  Horrack  in  Records  of 
the  Past,  I  St  series.  Vol.  IV,  pp.  121  ff.  See  also  Birch,  Facsimiles  of  Two 
Papyri,  London,  1863,  p.  3  ;  Deveria,  Catalogue  des  MSS.  Egyptiens, 
Paris,  1874,  pp.  130  ff.,  where  several  copies  of  this  work  are  described. 
Another  version  of  the  text  from  a  papyrus  in  the  British  Museum  (Papyrus 
of  Kerasher,  No.  9995)  was  published,  with  a  hieroglyphic  transcript  and 
translation,  by  me  in  Facsimiles  of  the  Papyri  of  Hunefer,  etc.,  and  see 
Pellegrini,  II  libro  secondo  delta  respirazione,  Rome,  1904. 

^  The  hieratic  text  of  this  work  was  published  with  a  French  translation 
by  P.  J.  de  Horrack,  les  lamentations  d'Isis  et  de  Nephthys,  Paris,  1886. 

^  A  hieroglyphic  transcript  of  these  works,  with  an  English  translation, 
was  given  by  me  in  Archceologia,  Vol.  LII,  London,  1891.  For  the  hieratic 
texts  see  Budge,  Hieratic  Papyri  in  the  British  Museum,  London,  1910, 


58 


The  Papyrus  of  Ani 


Litanies  of  Seker,"^  "The  Book  of  Traversing  Eternity,"^ 
and  the  like,  the  hymns  and  prayers  of  which  are  addressed 
to  Osiris  rather  as  the  god  of  the  dead  and  type  of  the 
resurrection  than  as  the  successor  of  the  great  cosmic  god 
Temu-Ra.  He  is  called  "  the  soul  that  liveth  again," ^  "  the 
being  who  becometh  a  child  again,"*  "  the  firstborn  son  of 
"  the  primeval  god,  the  lord  of  multitudes  of  aspects  and 
"  forms,  the  lord  of  time  and  bestower  of  years,  the  lord  of 
"  life  for  all  eternity."^  He  is  the  "  giver  of  life  from  the 
beginning,"*^  life  "springs  up  to  us  from  his  destruction,"^ 
and  the  germ  which  proceeds  from  him  engenders  life  in 
both  the  dead  and  the  living.^ 


1  What  Deveria  says  with  reference  to  the  Book  of  Respirations  applies 
to  the  whole  class  :  "Toutefois,  on  remarque  dans  cet  ecrit  une  tendance  a 
"  la  doctrine  de  la  resurrection  du  corps  plus  marquee  que  dans  les  com- 
"  positions  anterieures  "  {Catalogue,  p.  13). 

2  See  Bergmann,  Das  Buck  voffi  Dnrchzvandeln  der  Ewigkeif,  Vienna, 
1877  ;  an  English  rendering  of  it  will  be  found  in  my  Chapters  of  Coming 
Forth  by  Day,  2nd  ed.,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  678. 


a 


,   Festival Songs,lY,  2^. 


Ibid.,  VIII,  21;  IX,  8. 


^  Litanies  of  Seker,  Col.  XVIII 

6    ^ Q    0    ""^   §s        g^ 


AAAA/VA  III  1        C 

8     ^ 


Festival  Songs,  VI,  i. 

^^.     Ibid,  III,  18. 


k^^o 


AAAAAA 


1  I^ 


Q:£l     ©    III 

Ibid.,  IX,  26. 


lTli-1-PfI 


Hymn  to  Osiris  59 

APPENDIX 
I.— HYMN    TO   OSIRIS  1 

"  Homage  to  thee,  Osiris,  Lord  of  eternity,  King  of  the 
'  Gods,  whose  names  are  manifold,  whose  forms  are  holy, 
'  thou  being-  of  hidden  form  In  the  temples,  whose  Ka  is 
'  holy.  Thou  art  the  governor  of  Tattu  (Busiris),  and  also 
'  the  mighty  one  in  Sekhem  (Letopolis).  Thou  art  the 
'  Lord  to  whom  praises  are  ascribed  in  the  nome  of  Ati, 
'  thou  art  the  Prince  of  divine  food  in  Anu.  Thou  art  the 
'  Lord  who  is  commemorated  in  Maati,  the  Hidden  Soul, 
'  the  Lord  of  Qerrt  (Elephantine),  the  Ruler  supreme  in 
'  White  Wall  (Memphis).  Thou  art  the  Soul  of  Ra,  his 
*  own  body,  and  hast  thy  place  of  rest  in  Henensu  (Herakle- 
'  opolis).  Thou  art  the  beneficent  one,  and  art  praised  in 
'  Nart.  Thou  makest  thy  soul  to  be  raised  up.  Thou  art 
'  the  Lord  of  the  Great  House  in  Khemenu  (Hermopolis). 
'  Thou  art  the  mighty  one  of  victories  in  Shas-hetep,  the 
'  Lord  of  eternity,  the  Governor  of  Abydos.  The  path 
'  of  his  throne  is  in  Ta-tcheser  {i.e.,  a  part  of  Abydos). 
'  Thy  name  is  established  in  the  mouths  of  men.  Thou 
'  art  the  substance  of  the  Two  Lands  (Egypt).  Thou  art 
'  Tem,  the  feeder  of  the  Kau  (Doubles),  the  Governor  of 
'  the  Companies  of  the  gods.  Thou  art  the  beneficent 
'  Spirit  among  the  spirits.  The  god  of  the  Celestial  Ocean 
'  (Nu)  draweth  from  thee  his  waters.  Thou  sendest  forth 
'  the  north  wind  at  eventide,  and  breath  from  thy  nostrils 
'  to  the  satisfaction  of  thy  heart.  Thy  heart  reneweth  its 
'  youth,  thou  producest  the  ....  The  stars  in  the  celestial 
'  heights  are  obedient  unto  thee,  and  the  great  doors  of  the 
'  sky  open  themselves  before  thee.  Thou  art  he  to  whom 
'  praises  are  ascribed  In  the  southern  heaven,  and  thanks 
'  are  given  for  thee  In  the  northern  heaven.  The  imperlsh- 
'  able  stars  are  under  thy  supervision,  and  the  stars  which 

^  For  the  hieroglyphic  text  see  Ledrain,  Les  Monuments  Egyptiens  de  la 
Bibliotheque  Nationale,  Paris,  1879,  Plates  XXI-XXVII.  A  French 
rendering  was  given  by  Chabas  in  Revue  Arch.,  Paris,  1857,  t.  XIV,  pp.  65  if., 
and  an  English  rendering  m.  Records  of  the  Past,  ist  series.  Vol.  IV,  pp.  gg  f. 
See  also  Budge,  First  Steps,  pp.  i7g-i88,  and  Budge,  Osiris  and  the 
Egyptian  Resurrectiofi,  Vol.  II,  p.  75. 


6o  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

never  set  are  thy  thrones.  Offerings  appear  before  thee 
at  the  decree  of  Keb,  The  Companies  of  the  Gods  praise 
thee,  and  the  gods  of  the  Tuat  (Other  World)  smell  the 
earth  in  paying  homage  to  thee.  The  uttermost  parts  of 
the  earth  bow  before  thee,  and  the  limits  of  the  skies 
entreat  thee  with  supplications  when  they  see  thee.  The 
holy  ones  are  overcome  before  thee,  and  all  Egypt  offereth 
thanksgiving  unto  thee  when  it  meeteth  Thy  Majesty. 
Thou  art  a  shining  Spirit-body,  the  Governor  of  Spirit- 
bodies  ;  permanent  is  thy  rank,  established  is  thy  rule. 
Thou  art  the  well-doing  Sekhem  (Power)  of  the  Company 
of  the  Gods,  gracious  is  thy  face,  and  beloved  by  him  that 
seeth  it.  Thy  fear  is  set  in  all  the  lands  by  reason  of  thy 
perfect  love,  and  they  cry  out  to  thy  name  making  it  the 
first  of  names,  and  all  people  make  offerings  to  thee. 
Thou  art  the  lord  who  art  commemorated  in  heaven  and 
upon  earth.  Many  are  the  cries  which  are  made  to  thee 
at  the  Uak^  festival,  and  with  one  heart  and  voice  Egypt 
raiseth  cries  of  joy  to  thee. 

"  Thou  art  the  Great  Chief,  the  first  among  thy  brethren, 
the  Prince  of  the  Company  of  the  Gods,  the  stablisher  of 
Right  and  Truth  throughout  the  World,  the  Son  who 
was  set  on  the  great  throne  of  his  father  Keb.  Thou  art 
the  beloved  of  thy  mother  Nut,  the  mighty  one  of  valour, 
who  overthrew  the  Sebau-fiend.  Thou  didst  stand  up 
and  smite  thine  enemy,  and  set  thy  fear  in  thine  adversary. 
Thou  dost  bring  the  boundaries  of  the  mountains  {?). 
Thy  heart  is  fixed  (or,  determined),  thy  legs  are  set  firm. 
Thou  art  the  heir  of  Keb  and  of  the  sovereignty  of  the 
Two  Lands  (Egypt).  He  (Keb)  hath  seen  his  splendours, 
he  hath  decreed  for  him  the  guidance  of  the  world  by  thy 
hand  as  long  as  times  endure.  Thou  hast  made  this 
earth  with  thy  hand,  and  the  waters,  and  the  winds,  and 
the  vegetation,  and  all  the  cattle,  and  all  the  feathered 
fowl,  and  all  the  fish,  and  all  the  creeping  things,  and  all 
the  wild  animals  thereof  The  desert  is  the  lawful  posses- 
sion of  the  son  of  Nut.  The  Two  Lands  (Egypt)  are 
content  to  crown  thee  upon  the  throne  of  thy  father, 
like  Ra. 


^  This  festival  took  place  on  the  17th  and  i8th  days  of  the  month 
Thoth  ;  see  Brugsch,  Kalendarische  Jnschri/ten,  p.  235. 


Hymn  to  Osiris  6i 

*'  Thou  rollest  up  into  the  horizon,  thou  hast  set  Vight 
over  the  darkness,  thou  sendest  forth  air  (or,  Hght)  from 
thy  plumes,  and  thou  floodest  the  Two  Lands  Hke  the 
Disk  at  daybreak.  Thy  crown  penetrateth  the  height  of 
heaven,  thou  art  the  companion  of  the  stars,  and  the 
guide  of  every  god.  Thou  art  beneficent  in  decree  and 
speech,  the  favoured  one  of  the  Great  Company  of  the 
Gods,  and  the  beloved  of  the  Little  Company  of  the  Gods. 

"  His  sister  [Isis]  hath  protected  him,  and  hath  repulsed 
the  fiends,  and  turned  aside  calamities  (or,  times  [of  evil]). 
She  uttered  the  spell  with  the  magical  power  of  her 
mouth.  Her  tongue  was  perfect  (or,  well-trained),  and  it 
never  halted  at  a  word.  Beneficent  in  command  and 
word  was  Isis,  the  woman  of  magical  spells,  the  advocate 
of  her  brother.  She  sought  him  untiringly,  she  wandered 
round  and  round  about  this  earth  in  sorrow,  and  she 
alighted^  not  without  finding  him.  She  made  light  (or, 
air)  with  her  feathers,  she  created  air  with  her  wings,  and 
she  uttered  the  death  wail  for  her  brother.  She  raised 
up  the  inactive  members  of  him  whose  heart  was  still, 
she  drew  from  him  his  essence,  she  made  an  heir,^  she 
reared  the  child  in  loneliness,  and  the  place  where  he  was 
was  not  known,  and  he  grew  in  strength  and  stature, 
and  his  hand  was  mighty  in  the  House  of  Keb.  The 
Company  of  the  Gods  rejoiced,  rejoiced,  at  the  coming 
of  Horus,  the  son  of  Osiris,  whose  heart  was  firm,  the 
triumphant,  the  son  of  Isis,  the  heir  of  Osiris."^ 

Literally,  "she  alighted  not,"  ,JU.  ^^-^  5  the  whole  passage 


here  justifies  Plutarch's  statement  (Z^^  /side  et  Osiride,  i6)  concerning  Isis  : 
AvTrjv  8e  ytvojxivr)V  ^eA.tSoi'a  ttj  kiovi  TreptTreTea^at  koX  Oprjveiv. 

^  Compare   Plutarch,   op.   cit.,  §    19:    T^i/  8' 'lo-tv  jxtTo.  tyjv  reXexrrriv  i$ 
Ocr6/Di8os   crvyyevo/xevov,  T€K€lv  •j^A.i'to/u.tji/oi/  koi   daOevT]  rots  KaTojOev   yvCois  tov 

'ApTTOKpOLTrjV. 

2  The  remainder  of  the  hymn  refers  to  Horus. 


62 


The  Papyrus  of  Ani 


II.— OSIRIS   AND   HIS    PRINCIPAL   FORMS 
UNDER   THE    XVIIIth    DYNASTY 


1.  Unn-Nefer 

2.  Osiris  Ankhti 

3.  Osiris,  Lord  of  Life 

4.  Osiris  Nebertcher 

5.  Osiris  Khenti 

6.  Osiris  Orion  (Sah) 

7.  Osiris  Saa 

8.  Osiris,       Governor      of 

Temples 

9.  Osiris  in  Resnet 

10.  Osiris  in  Mehnet 

11.  Osiris  Everlasting  Gold 

12.  Osiris  Bati-erpit 

13.  Osiris  Ptah-neb-Ankh 


14.   Osiris,       Governor       of 
Rasta 


15.  Osiris,  Dweller  in  Set(?) 


Li^M^i 


Lm7:Mi 


-<2>- 


r^-^"^ 


1 6. 

17- 
i8. 

19. 

20. 

21. 


Forms  and  Towns  of  Osiris 
Osiris  in  Ati 


63 


Osiris  in  Sehtet 
Osiris  in  Netchfet 
Osiris  in  Resu 
Osiris  in  Pe 
Osiris  in  Netru 


22.  Osiris  in  Lower  Sais 


23- 

24. 

25- 

26. 

27. 

28. 
29. 

30. 

31- 


-<S>- 


U^M 


-cs^ 


Osiris  in  Bakt 
Osiris  in  Sunnu 
Osiris  in  Rehnent 
Osiris  in  Aper 
Osiris  in  Qeftenu 
Osiris  Sekri  in  Pet-she 


Osjris.  Governor  of  his      ^^^ 


Osiris  in  Pesk-ra 


Osiris  in  his  Shrines  in 
the  Land  of  the  North 


o  ^:^® 


i 


0%. 


ilg^^k^ 


■  1    3s: 


-<2> 


i  I 


-  I 


c>c:>< 


32.   Osiris  in  Heaven 


64  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

2,S-   Osiris  in  his  Shrines  in     .<s>-  vl  _M^J]  cr=i  ^^    i    U 
Rasta 


_i    111  \>  [^^^ 
34.  Osiris  Netchesti 


/VvAAAA     lO:, 

.<2>-  ill  ir^  w 


35.  Osiris  Tesur  X  5^  \  S  ^ 

36.  Osiris  Sekri  [1     J  ^  \\ 

37.  Osiris,       Governor       of       li      ^  ?  "^ 

Eternity  J>-  ^  I  ^ 

38.  Osiris  the  Begetter  X  ^i  ^  ^  '^  ''^^ 

39.  Osiris  in  Ater  XiU^i 

40.  Osiris  with  the  Plumes(?)  X  5^  ^  fl  |  ^=^  [|1 

41.  Osiris,  Lord  of  Eternity       i    Jj 


42.  Osiris  King  (Ati)  _J^  J  (] 

43.  Osiris  Taiti  XJdI^^^:?? 

45.  Osiris  on  his  Sand  ll    .^ 


44.   Osiris  in  Rasta 


<2>-  lU  I J       W 


46.  Osiris,  Governor  of  the  ri     ^  ill  '^"^  fl  8  ffT^  t^  Y 

Chamber  of  the  Cows  X  S?I  HIiI  ^  w  |' ^  |  f]  ^   | 

47.  Osiris  in  Tanent  X^k^iU^ 

48.  Osiris  in  Netbit  X^kZJ^^: 


49-   Osiris 

50.  Osiris 

51.  Osiris 

52.  Osiris 

53.  Osiris 

54.  Osiris 

55.  Osiris 

56.  Osiris 

57.  Osiris 

58.  Osiris 

59.  Osiris 

60.  Osiris 


n  Upper  Sau 

n  Nepert 
n  Shennu 
n  Henket 
n  Ta-Sekri 
n  Shau 
n  Fat-Heru 
n  Maati 
n  Hena 


Forms  and  Towns  of  Osiris 

nBetshu  X  I  k  J  S  ^  <^ 

"Tepu  XI  kT^^ 


65 


-<2>- 


D 


Q D 


s  <z:=>® 


Pa 


^„ 


ra 


w 


VOL.  I. 


66  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 


THE    DOCTRINE   OF   ETERNAL   LIFE 

The  ideas  and  beliefs  which  the  Egyptians  held  in 
reference  to  a  future  existence  are  not  easily  to  be 
described  in  detail,  owing  to  the  many  difficulties  in  trans- 
lating religious  texts  and  in  harmonizing  the  statements 
made  in  different  works  of  different  periods.  Some  confu- 
sion of  details  also  seems  to  have  existed  in  the  minds  of 
the  Egyptians  themselves,  which  cannot  be  cleared  up 
until  the  literature  of  the  subject  has  been  further  studied 
and  until  more  texts  have  been  published.  That  the 
Egyptians  believed  in  a  future  life  is  certain ;  and  the 
doctrine  of  eternal  existence  is  the  leading  feature  of  their 
religion,  and  is  enunciated  with  the  utmost  clearness  in  all 
periods.  And  it  is  quite  certain  that  the  belief  in  immor- 
tality among  the  Egyptians  is  one  of  the  oldest  of  their 
religious  beliefs.  The  attainment  of  a  renewal  of  life  in 
the  Other  World  was  the  aim  and  object  of  every  Egyptian 
believer.  To  this  end  all  the  religious  literature  of  Egypt 
was  composed.  Let  us  take  the  following  extracts  from 
texts  of  the  Vlth  dynasty  as  illustrations  : — 


Hail  Unas,  not     hast  thou  gone,    behold,    [as]    one  dead, 

thou  hast  gone  [as]  one  hving    to  sit    upon    the  throne  of  Osiris.^ 


O  Ra-Tum,   cometh  to  thee     thy  son,    cometh  to  thee       Unas       

thy  son  is      this        of       thy  body       for      ever.- 

1  Recueil  de  Travaux^  t.  Ill,  p.  20 1  (1.  206).     The  context  runs  "Thy 

"  Sceptre  ()  is  in  thy  hand,  and  thou  givest  commands  unto  the  Hving  ones. 

"  The  Mekes  and  Nehbet  sceptres  are  in  thy  hand,  and  thou  givest  com- 
"  mands  unto  those  whose  abodes  are  secret." 

2  Ibid.,  t.  Ill,  p.  208  (11.  232,  233). 


The  Doctrine  of  Eternal  Life  67 

O  Turn,    thy  son  is     this  Osiris  ;   thou  hast  given  his  sustenance 

D 


and  he  liveth ;  he  liveth,  and  liveth       Unas       this  ;    not     dieth  he,     not 


dieth       Unas       this.^ 


4.  :^  [sy]  k  f 

Setteth       Unas  in     life     in     Amenta.^ 

He^       hath  eaten       the  knowledge      of      god  every,    [his]  existence 


eternity,  his  limit     everlastingness      in         his  5^/^^       this;     what 

he  willeth    he  doeth,  [what]  he  hateth  not     doth  he  do/' 

0  0  — 

^-  T  ©    T  ^ 


Live  life,        not    shalt  thou  die.^ 

In  the  Papyrus  of  Ani  (Chapter  CLXXV)  the  deceased 
is  represented  as  having  come  to  a  place  remote  and  far 
away,  where  there  is  neither  air  to  breathe  nor  water  to 
drink,  but  where  he  holds  converse  with  Temu.  In  answer 
to  his  question,  "How  long  have  I  to  live?'"^  the  great 
god  of  Anu  answers  : — 

1  Recueil  de  Travaux,  t.  Ill,  p.  209  (1.  240). 

2  Ibid.,  t.  IV,  p.  50  (1.  445).     The  allusion  here  is  to  the  setting  of  the 
sun. 

3  I.e.,  Unas. 

■*  I.e.,  his  Spirit-body. 

5  Ibtd.,  t.  IV,  p.  61  (11.  520,  521). 

6  Ibid.,  t.  V,  p.  170  (Pepi,  1.  85). 

0  ^    ^  ^  □  ^  I  ' —   ^  T-     ^  •    Plate  XXIX,  1.  16.  (Book  of 

1  — H—     2i       Jl   i  O    I  _m^  1      ® 
the  Dead,  Chapter  CLXXV.) 

F    2 


68 


The  Papyrus  of  Ani 


q^ 


Thou  shalt  exist 
millions  of  years. 


for 


III 

millions 


III  i  O    I 

of      millions  of  years,     a  period 


of 


In  the  LXXXIVth  Chapter,  as  given  in  the  same 
papyrus,  the  infinite  duration  of  the  past  and  future  exis- 
tence of  the  soul,  as  well  as  its  divine  nature,  is  proclaimed 
by  Ani  in  the  words  : — 


of  divine  company.  My  soul 


I  am      Shu 
my  soul 


God 


O 


is       eternity. 


When  the  deceased  identifies  himself  with  Shu,  he 
makes  the  period  of  his  existence  coeval  with  that  of 
Temu-Ra,  i.e.,  he  existed  before  Osiris  and  the  other  gods 
of  his  company.  These  two  passages  prove  the  identity  of 
the  belief  in  eternal  life  in  the  XVIIIth  dynasty  with  that 
in  the  Vth  and  Vlth  dynasties. 

But  while  we  have  this  evidence  of  the  Egyptian  belief 
in  eternal  life,  we  are  nowhere  told  that  man's  corruptible 
body  will  rise  again  ;  indeed,  the  following  extracts  show 
that  the  idea  prevailed  that  the  body  lay  in  the  earth  while 
the  soul  or  spirit  lived  in  heaven  : — 


1. 


D    ^ 


Soul     to     heaven       body 


to      earth.2     (Vth  dynasty.) 


2,        /SAAAAA 


D    ^ 


Thy  essence  is      in     heaven,      thy  body 
o     Al      /I\ 


3. 


to      earth.^     (Vlth  dynasty.) 
I 


;^ 


Heaven    hath      thy  soul,      earth    hath    thy  body.''  (Ptolemaic  Period.) 

Plate  XXVIII,  1.  15. 

Reciieil  de  Travaux,  t.  IV,  p.  71  (1.  582). 

Ibid.,  t.  V,  p.  45  (1.  304). 

Horrack,  Lamentations  d'/sis  et  de  Nephthys,  Paris,  1 866,  p.  6. 


The  Doctrine  of  Eternal  Life  69 

There  is,  however,  no  doubt  that  from  first  to  last  the 
Egyptians  firmly  believed  that  besides  the  soul  there  was 
some  other  element  of  the  man  that  would  rise  again. 
The  preservation  of  the  corruptible  body,  too,  was  in  some 
way  connected  with  the  life  in  the  world  to  come,  and  its 
existence  was  necessary  to  ensure  eternal  life  ;  otherwise 
the  prayers  recited  to  this  end  would  have  been  futile,  and 
the  time-honoured  custom  of  mummifying  the  dead  would 
have  had  no  meanings.  The  never-ending-  existence  of  the 
soul  is  asserted  in  a  passage  quoted  above  without  reference 
to  Osiris  ;  but  the  frequent  mention  of  the  uniting  of  his 
bones,  and  of  the  gathering  together  of  his  members,^  and 
the  doing  away  with  all  corruption  from  his  body,  seems  to 
show  that  the  pious  Egyptian  connected  these  things  with 
the  resurrection  of  his  own  body  in  some  form,  and  he 
argued  that  what  had  been  done  for  him  who  was  pro- 
claimed to  be  giver  and  source  of  life  must  be  necessary  for 
mortal  man. 

The  physical  body  of  man  considered  as  a  whole  was 

called  khat  ^\ ^.  p,  ^^ ,  a  word  which  seems  to  be  con- 
nected with  the  idea  of  something  which  is  liable  to  decay. 
The  word  is  also  applied  to  the  mummified  body  in  the 
tomb,  as  we  know  from  the  words  "My  body  {kkat)  is 
buried."^  Such  a  body  was  attributed  to  the  god  Osiris  ;^ 
in  the  CLXIInd  Chapter  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead  "his 
great  divine  body  rested  in  Anu."*  In  this  respect  the 
god  and  the  deceased  were  on  an  equality.  As  we  have 
seen  above,  the  body  neither  leaves  the  tomb  nor  reappears 
on  earth  ;    yet  its  preservation  was  necessary.      Thus  the 

Already  in  the  Pyramid  Texts  we   have    Tl  §=5  V\    (  ^  1]  ] 


AAAAA'V 


^^^  ^ — *  "Rise  up,  O  thou  Teta !   Thou  hast  received  thy  head, 

thou   hast  knitted  together  thy  bones,  thou  hast  collected  thy  members." 
Recueil  de  Travaux,  t.  V,  p.  40  (1.  287). 

'^^S^i^S-^ Book  of  the  Dead. 

Chapter  LXXXVI,  1.  11. 

3  Papyrus  of  Afii,  Plate  VII,  1.  28,  and  Plate  XIX,  1.  8. 


70  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

deceased  addresses  Temu  ^ :  "  Hail  to  thee,  O  my  father 
"  Osiris,  I  have  come  and  I  have  embalmed  this  my  flesh 
"  so  that  my  body  may  not  decay.  I  am  whole,  even  as 
"  my  father  Khepera  was  whole,  who  is  to  me  the  type  of 
"  that  which  passeth  not  away,  Come  then,  O  Form,  and 
"  give  breath  unto  me,  O  lord  of  breath,  O  thou  who  art 
"  orreater  than  thy  compeers.  Stablish  thou  me,  and  form 
"  thou  me,  O  thou  who  art  lord  of  the  grave.  Grant  thou 
"to  me  to  endure  for  ever,  even  as  thou  didst  grant  unto 
"  thy  father  Temu  to  endure  ;  and  his  body  neither  passed 
"  away  nor  decayed.  I  have  not  done  that  which  is  hateful 
"  unto  thee,  nay,  I  have  spoken  that  which  thy  Ka  loveth  ; 
"  repulse  thou  me  not,  and  cast  thou  me  not  behind  thee, 
"  O  Temu,  to  decay,  even  as  thou  doest  unto  every  god  and 
"  unto  every  goddess  and  unto  every  beast  and  creeping 
"  thing  which  perisheth  when  his  soul  hath  gone  forth  from 
"  him  after  his  death,  and  which  falleth  in  pieces  after  his 

"  decay Homage  to  thee,  O  my  father  Osiris,  thy 

'*  flesh  suffered  no  decay,  there  were  no  worms  in  thee, 
"  thou  didst  not  crumble  away,  thou  didst  not  wither  away, 
"  thou  didst  not  become  corruption  and  worms  ;  and  I 
"  myself  am  Khepera,  I  shall  possess  my  flesh  for  ever  and 
"  ever,  I  shall  not  decay,  I  shall  not  crumble  away,  I  shall 
"  not  wither  away,  I  shall  not  become  corruption." 

But  the  body  does  not  lie  in  the  tomb  inoperative,  for 
by  the  prayers  and  ceremonies  on  the  day  of  burial  it  is 
endowed  with  the  power  of  changing  into  a  saJuc,  or  spiritual 
body.  Thus  we  have  such  phrases  as,  "  "I  flourish  (literally, 
"  'sprout')  like  the  plants,"^  "  My  flesh  flourisheth,"^^  "  I 
"  exist,  I  exist,  I  live,  I  live,  I  flourish,  I   flourish,"-^  ''  thy 

1  This  Chapter  is  inscribed  upon  one  of  the  linen  wrappings  of  the 
mummy  of  Thothmes  III,  and  a  copy  of  the  text  is  given  by  Naville 
{Todtenlmch,  Bd.  I,  Bh  179);  for  a  later  version  see  Lepsius,  Todtenbuch^ 
BI.  75,  where  many  interesting  variants  occur. 

"  .^=S^^    ^    ^  _^^^r   Chapter  LXXXIII,  3. 


w 


I .    Chapter  LXIV,  1.  49. 


Chapter  CUV,  1.  12. 


II 


The  Doctrine  of  Eternal  Life 


71 


"  soul  liveth,  thy  body  ^j]  flourisheth  by  the  command  of 

"  Ra  himself  without  diminution,  and  without  defect,  like 

It 
"  unto    Ra    for    ever    and    ever."^     The    word   sdhu 

I   V  8  ^^ '  'though  at  times  written  with  the  determinative 

of  a  mummy  lying  on  a  bier  like  khat,  "  body,"  indicates  a 
Spirit-body  which  is  lasting  and  incorruptible.  The  body 
which  has  become  a  sdhu  has  the  power  of  associating  with 
the  soul  and  of  holding  converse  with  it.  In  this  form  it 
can  ascend  into  heaven  and  dwell  with  the  gods,  and  with 
the  sdhtt  of  the  gods,  and  with  the  souls  of  the  righteous. 
In  the  Pyramid  Texts  we  have  these  passages  : — 


Rise  up  thou  Teta  this.        Stand  up  thou     mighty  one 


AW  l^i-  1-  m  \ 


0 


being  strong.         Sit  thou  with     the  gods,  do  thou        that  which 


n 


did  Osiris   in     the  great  house       in  Anu.       Thou  hast  received 


PT3 


thy  sah,  not       shall  be  fettered      thy  foot        in      heaven,    not 


Pt 


shalt  thou  be  turned  back      upon     earth. ^ 


T    ®    Q  '-i 


o 


^AAAAA      0  ,  1) 


(1  O       XI  fi  O  0-  Brugsch,  Liber  Metem- 


psychosis,  p.  22. 

2  Recueil  de  Travaux,  t.  V,  p.  36  (1.  271).     From  1.  143  of  the  same 
text  it  would  seem  that  a  man  had  more  than  one  sdhu,  for  the  words 

"all    thy  sahu,"  J[_^  |  [1 ^\[ °  I  """^^  ^^=^  ^ ' 

may,  however,  be  only  a  plural  of  majesty. 


occur. 


This 


AAA/VV\ 


72  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

Hail        to  thee,      Teta      on         this  thy  day       [when]    thou  art 
standing  before  Ra  [as]  he  cometh  from      the  east,  [when]       thou  art 
endued  with  this  thy  sd/i         among      the  souls.^ 

[His]  duration  of  Hfe     is      eternity,       his  limit  of  life     is     everlastingness 


in        his  sdA.^ 

4-^i i:isk^-- 

I  am  a  sak        with  his  soul.' 

In  the  late  Recension  of  the  Boo]<:of  the  Dead  published 
by  Lepsius  the  deceased  is  said  to  "look  upon  his  body  and  to 
rest  upon  his  saAu,'"^  and  souls  are  said  "  to  enter  into  their 
sa/iti "  ;  ^  and  a  passage  extant  both  in  this  and  the  older 
Theban  Recension  makes  the  deceased  to  receive  the  sd/iu  of 
the  god  Osiris.^  But  that  Egyptian  writers  at  times  con- 
fused the  Ma^  with  the  sdA?/-  is  clear  from  a  passage  in  the 
Book  of  Respirations,  where  it  is  said  :  "  Hail,  Osiris,  thy 
name  endureth,  thy  body  is  stablished,  thy  sd/i?t  flourisheth'V 

^  Recueil  de  Travaux,  t.  V,  p.  59  (1.  384). 

2  Ibid.,  t.  IV,  p.  61  (1.  521). 

3  Book  of  the  Dead,  Chapter  LXXVHI,  1.  14. 

Chapter  LXXXIX,  1.  6. 
5  Ibid.,  1.  5. 

'  ^  \^  "^-^  ^^  I  9  '  ^^-   Chapter  CXXX,  1.  38  (ed.  Naville). 
See  Brugsch,  liber  Metempsychosis,  p.  15. 


The  Doctrine  of  Eternal  Life  73 

in  other  texts  the  word  ''flourish"  is  appHed  only  to  the 
natural  body. 

In  close  connection  with  the  natural  and  spiritual  bodies 
stood  the  heart,  or  rather  that  part  of  it  which  was  the  seat 
of  the  power  of  life  and  the  fountain  of  good  and  evil 
thoughts.  And  in  addition  to  the  Natural-body  and  Spirit- 
body,  man  also  had  an  abstract  individuality  or  personality 
endowed  with  all  his  characteristic  attributes.  This  abstract 
personality  had  an  absolutely  independent  existence.  It 
could  move  freely  from  place  to  place,  separating  itself  from, 
or  uniting  itself  to,  the  body  at  will,  and  also  enjoying  life 

with  the  gods  in  heaven.     This  was  the  Ka  ^^  a  word 

which  at  times  conveys  the  meanings  of  its  Coptic  equivalent 

^  The  general  meaning  of  the  word  Ka  was  first  discovered  by  Nestor 
L'Hote,  and  his  discovery  was  published  in  his  Lettres  in  1840.     The  first 

Egyptologist  who  seriously  examined  the  meaning  of  the  word  LJ  was 
Dr.  Birch,  who  collected  several  examples  of  the  word  and  discussed  them  in  his 
Memoire  sur  line  Patere Egvptiovte  du  Musee  du  Louvre,  V^lxxs,  1858,  pp.  59  ff. 
(Extrait  du  t.  XXIV  des  Memoires  de  la  Societe  imperiale  des  Antiquaires  de 
France).  Dr.  Birch  translated  the  word  by  etre,  personne,  embleme,  divin, 
genie,  principe,  esprit.  In  September,  1878,  M.  Maspero  explained  to  the 
Members  of  the  Congress  of  Lyons  the  views  which  he  held  concerning 
this  word,  and  which  he  had  for  the  past  five  years  been  teaching  in  the 
College  de  France,  and  said  "  le  ka  est  une  sorte  de  double  de  la  personne 
"  humaine  d'une  matiere  moins  grossiere  que  la  matiere  dont  est  forme  le 
"  corps,  mais  qu'il  fallait  nourrir  et  entretenir  comme  le  corps  lui-meme  ;  ce 
"  double  vivait  dans  le  tombeau  des  offrandes  qu'on  faisait  aux  fetes 
"  canoniques,  et  aujourd'hui  encore  un  grand  nombre  des  genies  de  la 
"  tradition  populaire  egyptienne  ne  sont  que  des  doubles,  devenus  demons  au 
"  moment  de  la  conversion  des  fellahs  au  christianisme,  puis  a  Tislamisme." 
These  views  were  repeated  by  him  at  the  Sorbonne  in  February,  1879.  See 
Comptes  Rendus  du  Congres  provincial  des  Orientalistes,  Lyons,  1878,  t.  I, 
pp.  235-263  ;  Revue  Scientifique  de  la  France  et  de  VEtranger,  2®  serie, 
8^  annee,  No.  35,  March,  1879,  pp.  816-820;  Bulletin  de  P Association 
Scientifique  de  France,  No.  594,  1879,  t.  XXIII,  p.  373-384  ;  Maspero, 
Etudes  de  Mythologie  et  d'Archeologie,  t.  I,  pp.  i,  35,  126.  In  March,  1879, 
Mr.  Renouf  read  a  paper  entitled  "  On  the  true  sense  of  an  important 
Egyptian  word"  {Trans.  Soc.  Bibl.  Arch.,  Vol.  VI,  London,  1879, 
pp.  494-50S),  in  which  he  arrived  at  conclusions  similar  to  those  of 
M.  Maspero  ;  and  in  September  of  the  same  year  M.  Maspero  again 
treated  the  subject  in  Recueil  de  Travaux,  t.  I,  pp.  152  f.  The  various 
shades  of  meaning  in  the  word  have  been  discussed  subsequently  by  Brugsch, 
Worterbuch  (Suppl.),  pp.  997,  1230  ;  Diimichen,  Der  Grahpalast  des 
Patuarnenap,  Abt.  I,  p.  10;  Bergmann,  Der  Sarkophag  des  Panehemisis  {\n 
Jahrbuch  der  Kunsthistorischen  Sainnihingen  des  allerhochsten  Kaiserhauses, 
Vienna,  1883,  p.  5) ;  Wiedemann,  Die  Religion  der  alien  Aegypter,  p.  126. 


74  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

KOJ,  and  of  etScuXoi^,  image,  genius,  double,  character,  dis- 
position, and  mental  attributes.  What  the  Ka  really  was 
has  not  yet  been  decided,  and  Egyptologists  have  not  yet 
come  to  an  agreement  in  their  views  on  the  subject. 
Mr.  Griffith  thinks  i^Hieroglyphs,  p.  15)  that  "it  was  from 
"  one  point  of  view  regarded  as  the  source  of  muscular 
"  movement  and  power,  as  opposed  to  '  ba,'  the  will  or  soul 
"  which  set  it  in  motion."  This  view  is  substantially  that  of 
Erman  {^Religion,  p.  102).  Dr.  Steindorff  [A.Z.,  iQio, 
pp.  152  ff.)  thinks  that  the  Ka  was  a  genius,  and  not  a 
"  double."  His  views  are  traversed  by  Maspero  in  his 
paper  Le  Ka  des  Iigyptiens,  est-il  un  gdnie  ou  un  double 

{Zeitschinft  fiir  Kunst des  Alien  Orients,   Bd.   VI, 

pp.  125  ff.)  who  thinks  that  his  own  views  on  the  subject  are 
rather  strengthened  than  weakened  by  Dr.  Steindorft's  argu- 
ments. Mr.  Breasted  {JDevelopment,  p.  52)  thinks  that  the 
Ka  was  a  "  superior  genius  intended  to  guide  the  fortunes 
of  the  individual  in  the  hereafter^  The  relation  of  the  Ka 
to  the  funerary  offerings  has  been  ably  discussed  by  Baron 
Fr.  W.  V.  Bissing  ( Ver stick  einer  netieji  Erkldrung  des 
Kdi  der  alten  Aegypter  in  the  Sitztmgsberichtc  dcr  Kgl. 
Bayer.  Akad.,  Munich,  191 1),  and  it  seems  as  if  the  true 
solution  of  the  mystery  may  be  found  by  working  on  the 
lines  of  his  idea,  which  was  published  in  the  Rccueil,  1903, 
p.  182,  and  by  comparing  the  views  about  the  "double" 
held  by  African  peoples  throughout  the  Sudan.  The 
funeral  offerings  of  meat,  cakes,  ale,  wine,  unguents,  etc., 
were  intended  for  the  Ka  ;  the  scent  of  the  burnt  incense 
was  grateful  to  it.  The  Ka  dwelt  in  the  man's  statue  just 
as  the  Ka  of  a  god  inhabited  the  statue  of  the  god.  In  the 
remotest  times  the  tombs  had  special  chambers  wherein 
the  Ka  was  worshipped  and  received  offerings.  The  priest- 
hood numbered  among  its  body  an  order  of  men  who  bore 

the  name  of  "  priests  of  the  Ka  "  y  i  ,  and  who  performed 
services  in  honour  of  the  Ka  in  the  "  Ka  chapel  "   J       ^. 

In  the  text  of  Unas  the  deceased  is  said  to  be  "  happy 
with  his  Ka"  ^  in  the  next  world,  and  his  Ka  is  joined  unto 


1 1  ^^^ —  rsToi  \ —  Lj  1,7 


The  Doctrine  of  Eternal  Life 


75 


his  body  in  "  the  great  dwelHng  "  ;  ^  his  body  having  been 
buried  in  the  lowest  chamber,  "his  Ka  cometh  forth  to 
him."^     Of  Pepi  I  it  is  said  : — 


+ 


Q 


Washed  is  thy  Ka,  sitteth        thy  Ka    [and]     it  eateth     bread 

^ ,        — '^—      %^  ^-==^  ^ ^ 

^ ^  -^  AAAA/V\  ]1  '='1 

with  thee    unceasingly  for      ever.^ 


hn^  Af^u 


Thou  art  pure, 


thy  Ka  is  pure. 


thy  soul  is  pure. 


i^rm 


thy  form  is  pure.* 

The   Ka,  as  we  have  seen,  could  eat  food,  and  it  was 

necessary  to  provide  food   for  it.      In  the  Xllth  dynasty 

and  in  later  periods  the  gods  are  entreated  to  grant  meat 

and  drink  to  the  Ka  of   the  deceased  ;    and    it   seems   as 

if  the   Egyptians  thought   that  the   existence  of   the   Ka 

depended  upon  a  constant  supply  of  sepulchral   offerings. 

When  circumstances  rendered  it  impossible  to  continue  the 

material   supply  of  food,    the    Ka  fed   upon   the   offerings 

painted  on  the  walls  of  the  tomb,  which  were  transformed 

into  suitable  nourishment  by  means  of  the  prayers  of  the 

living.     When   there   were   neither   material   offerings   nor 

•  •  •      1 

painted   similitudes   to   feed   upon,    it  seems  as  if  the    Ka 

must  have  perished  ;   but  the  texts  are  not  definite  on  this 

point. 

The  following  is  a  specimen  of  a  petition  for  food  for 

the  Ka  written  in  the  XVIIIth  dynasty  : — 

"  May  the  gods  grant  that  1  go  into  and  come  forth 


c 


LI   f^. 


,1. 


u 


■,  1. 483. 


2  Recueil  de  Travaux,  t.  V,  p.  166,  1.  67. 
*  Ibid.,  1.  112. 


NEW  YORK  UNIVERSITY 

mmmi  mm 

•  LIBRARY  • 


76  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

"  from  my  tomb,  may  the  Majesty  refresh  its  shade,  may  I 
"  drink  water  from  my  cistern  every  day,  may  all  my  limbs 
"grow,  may  Hapi  give  unto  me  bread  and  flowers  of  all 
"kinds  in  their  season,  may  I  pass  over  my  estate  every 
"  day  without  ceasing,  may  my  soul  alight  upon  the  branches 
"  of  the  groves  which  I  have  planted,  may  I  make  myself 
"  cool  beneath  my  sycamores,  may  I  eat  the  bread  which 
"  they  provide.  May  I  have  my  mouth  that  I  may  speak 
"  therewith  like  the  followers  of  Horus,  may  I  come  forth 
"  to  heaven,  may  I  descend  to  earth,  may  I  never  be  shut 
"  out  upon  the  road,  may  there  never  be  done  unto  me  that 
"  which  my  soul  abhorreth,  let  not  my  soul  be  imprisoned, 
"  but  may  I  be  among  the  venerable  and  favoured  ones, 
"  may  I  plough  my  lands  in  the  Field  of  Aaru,  may  I 
"  arrive  at  the  Field  of  Peace,  may  one  come  out  to  me 
"  with  vessels  of  ale  and  cakes  and  bread  of  the  lords  of 
"  eternity,  may  I  receive  meat  from  the  altars  of  the  great, 
"  I  the  Ka  of  the  prophet  Menu."^ 

To    that    part    of    man    which    beyond    all    doubt    was 
believed  to  enjoy  an  eternal  existence  after  the  death  of  the 

body,  the  Egyptians  gave  the  name  Ba  c^  ,  a  word  which 

has  been  thought  to  mean  something  like  "sublime," 
"noble,"  and  which  has  always  hitherto  been  translated 
by  "soul,"  or  "heart-soul."  It  was  closely  associated  with 
the  Ka  and  the  Ab,  or  heart,  and  it  was  one  of  the 
principles   of  life   in   man.      In    form    it    is    depicted    as  a 

human-headed  hawk   T\  ,  and  in  nature  and  substance  it 

is  stated  to  be  exceedingly  refined  or  ethereal.  It  revisited 
the  body  in  the  tomb  and  re-animated  it,  and  conversed 
with  it ;  it  could  take  upon  itself  any  shape  that  it  pleased  ; 
and  it  had  the  power  of  passing  into  heaven  and  of  dwelling 
with  the  perfected  souls  there.  It  was  eternal.  As  the 
Ba  was  closely  associated  with  the  Ka,  it  partook  of  the 
funeral  offerings,  and  in  one  aspect  of  its  existence  at  least 
it  was  liable  to  decay  if  not  properly  and  sufficiently 
nourished.  In  the  Pyramid  Texts  the  permanent  dwelling- 
place  of  the  Ba  or  soul  is  heaven  with  the  gods,  whose  life 
it  shares  : — 

1  See  Trans.  Soc.  Bib/.  Arch.,  Vol.  VI,  pp.  307,  308. 


The  Doctrine  of  Eternal  Life 


77 


Behold       Unas       cometh  forth    on  day  this      in        the  form 


J" 


f 


real  of      a  soul    living.^ 


Their  soul-      is  in  Unas/'^ 

Standeth  thy  soul  among     the  gods.^ 


'■ra^CIEI^^     \ 


o     I 


k    i^P 


Hail,         Pepi       this  !  cometh  to  thee  the  eye  of  Horus,   it  speaketh 


\ 


w    m 


with  thee.     Cometh  to  thee      thy  soul    which  is  among   the  gods." 


-i.n 


\\  m 


Pure  is  thy  soul     among    the  gods.^ 

As  liveth    Osiris,    and  as  liveth  the  soul      in 
D 


\^    f 


Netat,  so  liveth 


c 


Pepi      this.''' 


'•AP 


(Ml  ^  ^-  innmmnmn 


Its  piaceth    thy  soul        Pepi       this  among     |  '^^  ^'^^"-^^  l^^^l^  '^'^'' } 

WW  ^- 


in  the  form  of  the  uraei   [which]  are  on    thy  brow.^ 

^  Recueil  de  Travaux,  t.  IV,  p.  52  (1.  455). 

^  I.e.,  the  soul  of  the  gods. 

3  Ibid.,  t.  IV,  p.  61  (1.  522). 

^  Ibid.,  t.  V,  p.  55  (1.  350),  and  see  Pepi  I,  11.  19,  20. 

s  Ibid.,  t.  V,  p.  160  (1.  13).  '^  Ibid.,  t.  V,  p.  175  (1.  113). 

7  Ibid.,  t.  V,  p.  183  (1.  166). 

8  I.e.,  the  Eye  of  Horus.  ^  Ibid.,  t.  V,  p.  184  (1.  167). 


78 


The  Papyrus  of  Ani 


s-ra^CIEI^  V 


C   IP 


Behold       Pepi       this,     thy  soul  is  the  Souls  of  Anu  ;  behold  thy  soul 

n 


o^ 


is  the  Souls    of  Nekhen  ;    behold      thy  soul    is  the  Souls    of  Pe  ;     behold 

thy  soul    is  a  star   living,    behold,    among        its  brethren.^ 

In  connection  with  the  Ka  and  Ba  must  be  mentioned 
the  Khaibit  "f  ,  or  shadow  of  the  man,  which  the  Egyptians 
reo-arded  as  a  part  of  the  human  economy.  It  may  be 
compared  with  the  a  Kid  and  ttmbra  of  the  Greeks  and 
Romans.  It  was  supposed  to  have  an  entirely  independent 
existence  and  to  be  able  to  separate  itself  from  the  body  ; 
it  was  free  to  move  wherever  it  pleased,  and,  like  the  Ka 
and  Ba,  it  partook  of  the  funeral  offerings  in  the  tomb, 
which  it  visited  at  will.  The  mention  of  the  shade,  whether 
of  a  god  or  man,  in  the  Pyramid  Texts  is  unfrequent,  and  it 
is  not  easy  to  ascertain  what  views  were  held  concerning  it ; 
but  from  the  passage  in  the  text  of  Unas,^  where  it  is 
mentioned  together  with  the  souls  and  spirits  and  bones  of 
the  gods,  it  is  evident  that  already  at  that  early  date  its 
position  in  relation  to  man  was  well  defined.  From  the 
collection  of  illustrations  which  Dr.  Birch  appended  to  his 
paper  On  the  Shade  or  Shadow  of  the  Dead^  it  is  quite 
clear  that  in  later  times  at  least  the  shadow  was  always 
associated  with  the  soul  and  was  believed  to  be  always  near 
it ;  and  this  view  is  supported  by  a  passage  in  the  XCIInd 
Chapter  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead,  where  it  is  said  : — 


O    \\    £3 
Let  not  be  shut  in 


my  soul. 


let  not  be  fettered 


T, 


my  shadow, 


1  Recueil  de  Travaux,  t.  V,  p.  184  (I.  168). 


p.  62  (1. 523). 

3  See  Trails.  Soc.  Bibl.  Arch.,  Vol.  VIII,  pp.  386-97. 


The  Doctrine  of  Eternal  Life 


79 


£^ 


let  be  opened  the  way  for      my  soul  and  for  my  shadow, 


may  it  see 


1  i 


the  great  god. 

And  again,  in  the  LXXXIXth  Chapter  the  deceased 
says  : — 

May  I  look  upon     my  soul     and  my  shadow.^ 

Another  important  and  apparently  eternal  part  of  man 
was  the  Kiiu,  '^ ,  which,  judging  from  the  meaning  of  the 
word,  may  be  defined  as  a  "shining"  or  translucent  Spirit- 
soul,  For  want  of  a  better  word  Khu  has  often  been 
translated  "shining  one,"  "glorious,"  "intelligence,"  and 
the  like,  but  its  true  meaning  must  be  Spirit-soul.  The 
Pyramid  Texts  show  us  that  the  Khu's  of  the  gods  lived  in 
heaven,  and  thither  wended  the  Khu  of  a  man  as  soon  as 
ever  the  body  died.  Thus  it  is  said,  "  Unis  standeth  with 
the  Khu's,"-  and  one  of  the  gods  is  asked  to  "  give  him  his 
sceptre  among  the  Khu's  "  ;  ^  when  the  souls  of  the  gods 
enter  into  Unas,  their  Khu's  are  with  and  round  about  him.''' 
To  Kino-  Teta  it  is  said  : — 


He  ^  hath  plucked     his  eye 


^kP 


from  himself,    he  hath  given  it     unto  thee 


to  strengthen  thee  therewith,  that  thou  mayest  prevail       with  it      among 
the  Khu's.* 


^   Todtetilmch,  Bd.  I,  Bl.  loi. 


(1.  71). 

p.  215  (1.  274). 

'  %%%  P 

^  I.e.,  Horus. 


Recueil  de  IVavaux,  t.  Ill,  p.  188 
[fill  -^%%.       Ibid.,  t.  Ill, 


C^. 


[)pl.     Ibid.,  t.  IV,  p.  61  (1.  522] 


^  Ibid.,  t.  V,  p.  19  (1.  174). 


8o  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

And  again,  when  the  god  Khent-mennut-f  has  trans- 
ported the  king  to  heaven,  the  god  Keb,  who  rejoices  to 
meet  him,  is  said  to  give  him  both  hands  and  welcome  him 
as  a  brother  and  to  nurse  him  and  to  place  him  among  the 
imperishable  Khu's.^  In  the  XCI  Ind  Chapter  the  deceased 
is  made  to  pray  for  the  liberation  of  his  soul,  shadow,  and 
Khu  from  the  bondage  of  the  tomb,  and  for  deliverance 
from  those  "  whose  dwellings  are  hidden,  who  fetter  the 
"  souls,  who  fetter  souls  and  Khu's  and  who  shut  in  the 
"  shadows  of  the  dead  "  ;  and  in  the  XCIst  Chapter  is 
a  formula  specially  prepared  to  enable  the  Khu  to  pass  from 
the  tomb  to  the  domains  where  Ra  and  Hathor  dwell. 

Yet  another  part  of  a  man  was  supposed  to  exist  in 
heaven,   to  which  the  Egyptians  gave  the  name  Sekhem, 

n  #  ^\   'y'  •     The  word  has  been  rendered  by  "  vital  power," 

and  the  like,  but  it  is  very  difficult  to  find  any  expression 
which  will  represent  the  Egyptian  conception  of  the 
Sekhem.  It  is  mentioned  in  connection  with  the  soul  and 
Khu,  as  will  be  seen  from  the  following  passages  from  the 
Pyramid  Texts  : — 

Cometh  to  thee  thy  Sekhem         among     the  Kiiu's.- 

Pure  is  thy  Sekhem  among         the  Khu's.^ 

Thou  art  pure,  pure  is         thy  Ka,  pure  is 


thy  soul,  pure  is  thy  Sekhem.* 


de  Travaux,  t.  V,  p.  41  (1.  289). 

2  Ibid.,  t.  V,  p.  160  (1.  14). 

3  //;/^.,  t.  V,  p.  175(1.  113). 

4  Ibid.,  t.  V,  p.  175  (1.  112). 


The  Doctrine  of  Eternal  Life  8i 

A   name   of  Ra  was   ll  y  ®  ^.  ^^  ^  Sekhem   Ur,  the 

"Great    Sekhem,"    and    Unas    is  identified  with  him  and 
called  : — 

Great  Sekhem,     Sekhem     among     the  Sekhemu.^ 

Finally,  the  name,  W^ ,  Ren,  of  a  man  was  believed 

to  exist  in  heaven,  and  in  the  Pyramid  Texts  we  are  told 
that 


'"'^  (□1y     ..  _.    Q       n   '^^=-   T   <^     (□ 


T  ®    l! 


Happy     is        Pepi         this        with      his  name,      Hveth  Pepi        this 

with  his  Ka.3 

Thus,  as  we  have  seen,  the  whole  man  consisted  of 
a  natural  body,  a  Spirit-body,  a  heart,  a  double,  a  Heart-soul, 
a  shadow,  a  Spirit-soul,  and  a  name.  All  these  were, 
however,  bound  together  inseparably,  and  the  welfare  of 
any  single  one  of  them  concerned  the  welfare  of  all.  For 
the  well-being  of  the  spiritual  parts  it  was  necessary  to 
preserve  from  decay  the  natural  body  ;  and  certain  passages 
in  the  Pyramid  Texts  seem  to  show  that  a  belief  in  the 
resurrection  of  the  natural  body  existed  in  the  earliest 
dynasties.* 

The  texts  are  silent  as  to  the  time  when  the  immortal 
part  began  its  beatified  existence  ;  but  it  is  probable  that 
the  Osiris  ^  of  a  man  only  attained  to  the  full  enjoyment  of 

^  Recueil  de  Travaux,  t.  IV,  p.  44  (1.  393). 

2  Ibid.,  p.  60  (11.  514,  515)-  '  ^^id.,  t.  V,  p.  185  (1.  169). 

'  ^•^•'  CHJ  Li\lZln\^^"  ™^  ^^P*  ^"^^^^  ^^^^^ 
with  his  flesh."     I/>td.,  t.  V,  p.  185  (1.  169). 

5  The  Osiris  consisted  of  all  the  spiritual  parts  of  a  man  gathered 
together  in  a  form  which  resembled  him  exactly.  Whatever  honour  was 
paid  to  the  mummified  body  was  received  by  its  Osiris,  the  offerings  made 
to  it  were  accepted  by  its  Osiris,  and  the  amulets  laid  upon  it  were  made 
use  of  by  its  Osiris  for  its  own  protection.  The  sd/iu,  the  Aa,  the  da,  the 
k/iu,  the  khaibit,  the  sekhem,  and  the  ren  were  in  primeval  times  separate 
and  independent  parts  of  man's  immortal  nature  ;  but  in  the  Pyramid  Texts 
VOL.  I.  G 


82  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

spiritual  happiness  after  the  funeral  ceremonies  had  been 
duly  performed  and  the  ritual  recited,  Comparativ^ely  few- 
particulars  are  known  of  the  manner  of  life  of  the  soul  in 
heaven,  and  though  a  number  of  interesting  facts  may  be 
gleaned  from  the  texts  of  all  periods,  it  is  very  difficult  to 
harmonize  them.  This  result  is  due  partly  to  the  different 
views  held  by  different  schools  of  thought  in  ancient  Egypt, 
and  partly  to  the  fact  that  on  some  points  the  Egyptians 
themselves  seem  to  have  had  no  decided  opinions.  We 
depend  upon  the  Pyramid  Texts  for  our  knowledge  of  their 
earliest  conceptions  of  a  future  life. 

The  life  of  the  Osiris  of  a  man  in  heaven  is  at  once 
material  and  spiritual  ;  and  it  seems  as  if  the  Egyptians 
never  succeeded  in  breaking  away  from  their  very  ancient 
habit  of  confusing  the  things  of  the  body  with  the  things  of 
the  soul.  They  believed  in  an  incorporeal  and  immortal 
part  of  man,  the  constituent  elements  of  which  flew  to 
heaven  after  death  ;  yet  the  theologians  of  the  Vlth  dynasty 
had  decided  that  there  was  some  part  of  the  deceased  which 
could  only  mount  to  heaven  by  means  of  a  ladder.  In  the 
pyramid  of  Teta  it  is  said  :  "  When  Teta  hath  purified 
"  himself  on  the  borders  of  this  earth  where  Ra  hath 
"  purified  himself,  he  prayeth  and  setteth  up  the  ladder,  and 
"  those  who  dwell  in  the  great  place  press  Teta  forward 
"  with  their  hands."^  In  the  pyramid  of  Pepi  I  the  king  is 
identified  with  this  ladder  :  "  Isis  saith,  '  Happy  are  they 
"  who  see  the  father,'  and  Nephthys  saith,  'They  who  see 
"  the  father  have  rest,'  speaking  unto  the  father  of  this 
"  Osiris  Pepi  when  he  cometh  forth  into  heaven  among  the 
**  stars  and  among  the  luminaries  which  never  set.  VVith 
"  the  uraeus  on  his  brow,  and  his  book  upon  both  his  sides, 

they  are  welded  together,  and  the  dead  king  Pepi  is  addressed  as  "  Osiris 
Pepi."  The  custom  of  calling  the  deceased  Osiris  continued  until  the 
Roman  Period.  On  the  Osiris  of  a  man,  see  Wiedemann,  Die  Oiirianische 
Unsterblichkeitslehre  (in  Die  Religion  der  alteti  Aegypter,  p.  128). 


/  I         AAyvA/VA      I  1 1      I         Jt 


-x^^im-^^^\.m\\ 


a 


<::3>   I  /wwvA  ^/w^  (  S  (]  ]•     Maspero,  Recueil  de  Travaux,  t.  V,  p.  7 

(1-  36).  '  ~~ 


The  Doctrine  of  Eternal  Life  83 

"  and  magic  words  at  his  feet,  Pepi  goeth  forward  unto  his 
"  mother  Nut,  and  he  entereth  therein  in  his  name  Ladder."^ 
The  gods  who  preside  over  this  ladder  are  at  one  time  Ra 
and  Horus,  and  at  another  Horus  and  Set.  In  the  pyramid 
of  Unas  it  is  said  :  "  Ra  setteth  upright  the  ladder  for  Osiris, 
and  Horus  raiseth  up  the  ladder  for  his  father  Osiris, 
when  Osiris  goeth  to  [find]  his  soul ;  one  standeth  on  the 
one  side,  and  the  other  standeth  on  the  other,  and  Unas 
is  betwixt  them.  Unas  standeth  up  and  is  Horus,  he 
sitteth  down  and  is  Set."^  And  in  the  pyramid  of  Pepi  I 
we  read  :  "  Hail  to  thee,  O  Ladder  of  God,  hail  to  thee, 
O  Ladder  of  Set.  Stand  up,  O  Ladder  of  God,  stand 
up,  O    Ladder  of  Set,    stand  up,    O    Ladder  of  Horus, 

whereon  Osiris   went  forth   into  heaven This 

Pepi  is  thy  son,  this  Pepi  is  Horus,  thou  hast  given  birth 
unto  this  Pepi  even  as  thou  hast  given  birth  unto  the  god 
who  is  the  lord  of  the  ladder.  Thou  hast  given  him  the 
Ladder  of  God,  and  thou  hast  given  him  the  Ladder  of 

Set,  whereon  this  Pepi  hath  gone  forth  into  heaven 

Every  Khu  and  every  god  stretcheth  out  his  hand  unto 
this  Pepi  when  he  cometh  forth  into  heaven  by  the 
Ladder  of  God  ....  that  which  he  seeth  and  that  which 
he  heareth  make  him  wise,  and  serve  as  food  for  him 
when  he  cometh  forth  into  heaven  by  the  Ladder  of  God. 
Pepi  riseth  up  like  the  uraeus  which  is  on  the  brow  of 
Set,  and  every  Khu  and  every  god  stretcheth  out  his 
hand  unto  Pepi  on  the  Ladder.  Pepi  hath  gathered 
together  his  bones,  he  hath  collected  his  flesh,  and  Pepi 
hath  gone  straightway  into  heaven  by  means  of  the  two 
finorers  of  the  orod  who  is  the  Lord  of  the  Ladder."^ 
Elsewhere  we  are  told  that  Khensu  and  Set  "carry  the 
Ladder  of  Pepi,  and  they  set  it  up." 

When  the  Osiris  of  a  man  has  entered  into  heaven  as 
a  living  soul,*  he  is  regarded  as  one  of  those  who  "have 
eaten  the  eye  of  Horus  "  ;  ^  he  walks  among  the  living  ones, 

^  Recueil  de  Travaux,  t.  V,  p.  190  (11.  181,  182). 

2  Ibid.,  t.  IV,  p.  70  (11.  579  ff.). 

^  Etudes  de  Mythologie  et  d" ArcMologie,  t.  I,  p.  344,  note  i. 

4   ^  (j  ^^^^  %  3^  ^ fl  ' V  "^  ■?-•    Recueil  de  Travaux,  t.  V, 

p.  52  (1.  456). 

•=9)  AAA^yvA  1  ft/vvw\  <2>.  w^^y^  v\  .  /(^/^.;t.  Ill,  p.  165  (line  169). 

G    2 


84  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

■¥■•¥■"¥"  .^  he  becomes  "  God,  the  son  of  God,"  ~  and  all  the 

gods  of  heaven  become  his  brethren,^  His  bones  are  the 
gods  and  goddesses  of  heaven  ;  *  his  right  side  belongs  to 
Horus,  and  his  left  side  to  Set  ;^  the  goddess  Nut  makes 
him  to  rise  up  as  a  god  without  an  enemy  in  his  name 
"  God  "  ;^  and  God  calls  him  by  his  name.'''  His  face  is  the 
face  of  Up-uat,  his  eyes  are  the  great  ones  among  the  souls 
of  Anu,  his  nose  is  Thoth,  his  mouth  is  the  great  lake,  his 
tongue  belongs  to  the  boat  of  right  and  truth,  his  teeth  are 
the  spirits  of  Unu,  his  chin  is  Khert-khent-Sekhem,  his 
backbone  is  Sema,  his  shoulders  are  Set,  his  breast  is 
Beba,^  etc.  ;  every  one  of  his  members  is  identified  with 
a  god.  Moreover,  his  body  as  a  whole  is  identified  with 
the  God  of  Heaven.  For  example  it  is  said  concerning 
Unas  : — 

Thy  body  is  the  body  of        Unas  this.      The  flesh    is  the  flesh    of 


(ME  1.  m--  m  c^ip] 


/v\AAA^ 


Unas  this.      Thy  bones    are  the  bones         of  Unas  this. 


-rr  (  ^mi  I        °         -rr 


Thy  passage  is  the  passage      of  Unas  this.  The  passage        of  Unas 


this  is  thy  passage.^ 

^  Recueil  de  Travaux,  t.  V,  p.  183  (1.  166). 


W\-      See  Pyramid  of  Teta  {Recueil,  t.  V),  11.  45,  137,  197,  302. 


Ibid.,  t  IIT,  p.  202  (1.  209). 
5  Jbid.,  t.  V,  p.  23  (1.  198). 


6 


1 


Ibid.,  t.  V,  p.  38  (1.  279). 


7  Ibid.,  p.  26  (1.  222).  8  Ibid.,  t.  VIII,  p.  88  (11.  565  ff.). 

»  Ibid.,  t.  Ill,  p.  214  (1.  268). 


The  Doctrine  of  Eternal  Life  85 

Further,  this  identification  of  the  deceased  with  the  God 
of  Heaven  places  him  in  the  position  of  supreme  ruler. 
For  example,  we  have  the  prayer  that  Unas  "  may  rule  the 
nine  gods  and  complete  the  company  of  the  nine  gods,"^ 
and  Pepi  I,  in  his  progress  through  heaven,  comes  upon 
the  double  company  of  the  gods,  who  stretch  out  their 
hands,  entreating  him  to  come  and  sit  down  among  them.^ 

Again,  the  deceased  is  changed  into  Horus,  the  son  of 
Osiris  and  Isis.  It  is  said  of  Pepi  I,  "  Behold  it  is  not 
"  Pepi  who  entreateth  to  see  thee  in  the  form  in  which  thou 

"  art  M  ^^  n  v^     M  (1  ^~^.  O  Osiris,  who  entreateth  to  see 

"  thee  in  the  form  in  which  thou  art,  O  Osiris  ;  but  it  is  thy 
"  son  who  entreateth  to  see  thee  in  the  form  in  which  thou 
"  art,  O  Osiris,  it  is  Horus  who  entreateth  to  see  thee  in 
"  the  form  in  which  thou  art"  ;^  and  Horus  does  not  place 
Pepi  at  the  head  of  the  dead,  but  among  the  divine  gods.* 
Elsewhere  we  are  told  that  Horus  has  taken  his  Eye  and 
given  it  to  Pepi,  and  that  the  odour  of  Pepi's  body  is  the 
odour  of  the  Eye  of  Horus. ^  Throughout  the  Pyramid 
Texts  the  Osiris  of  the  deceased  is  the  son  of  Temu,  or 
Temu-Ra,  Shu,  Tefnut,  Keb,  and  Nut,  the  brother  of  Isis, 
Nephthys,  Set,  and  Thoth,  and  the  father  of  Horus  ;  ^  his 
hands,  arms,  belly,  back,  hips  and  thighs,  and  legs  are  the 
god  Temu,  and  his  face  is  Anubis.'^  He  is  the  brother  of  the 
moon,^  he  is  the  child  of  the  star  Sothis,^  he  revolves  in 

'  A-ivKsg]^'.iii¥--nmmi- 

Recueil  de  Travaux,  t.  Ill,  p.  217  (1.  283). 

'^k-iiimminmmT  pxa 

t.  VII,  p.  150  (1.  263). 

3  Ibid.,  t.  VII,  p.  155  (11.  315  f.). 

=  Ih'd.,  t.  VII,  p.  169  (1.  457).  ^  Ii>id.,  t.  Ill,  pp.  209-211. 

''  Ibid.,  p.  201  (1.  207). 

8  I  (^gjjj     °^  j_i]  i  ^   ^        ^'^'^•'  ^-  ^'  P-    '98  (1-   203). 

9  Idid.,  t.  IV,  p.  44,  1.  390. 


86  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

heaven  Hke  Orion  "^  and  Sothis  HA     °    ^  ,^  and  he  rises 

in  his  place  Hke  a  star.-  The  gods,  male  and  female,  pay- 
homage  to  him,^  every  being  in  heaven  adores  him  ;  and  in 
one  interesting  passage  it  is  said  of  Pepi  I  that  "  when  he 
"  hath  come  forth  into  heaven  he  will  find  Ra  standing  face 
"  to  face  before  him,  and,  having  seated  himself  upon  the 
"  shoulders  of  Ra,  Ra  will  not  let  him  put  himself  down 
"  again  upon  the  ground  ;  for  he  knoweth  that  Pepi  is  more 
"  shining    than    the   shining  ones,   more   perfect  than   the 

"  perfect,  and  more  stable  than  the  stable  ones 

"  When  Pepi  standeth  upon  the  north  of  heaven  with  Ra, 
"  he  becometh  lord  of  the  universe  like  unto  the  king  of  the 
"  gods.""^  To  the  deceased  Horus  gives  his  own  Ka,^  and 
also  drives  away  the  Ka's  of  the  enemies  of  the  deceased 
from  him,  and  hamstrings  his  foes/'  By  the  divine  power 
thus  given  to  the  deceased  he  brings  into  subjection  the 
Ka's  of  the  gods^  and  other  Ka's,^  and  he  lays  his  yoke 
upon  the  Ka's  of  the  triple  company  of  the  gods/  He  also 
becomes  Thoth,^*^  the  intelligence  of  the  gods,  and  he  judges 
hearts  ;  ^^  and  the  hearts  of  those  who  would  take  away  his 
food  and  the  breath  from  his  nostrils  become  the  prey  of 
his  hands/^ 

1  Recueil  de  Travaux,  t.  Ill,  p.  205  (11.  221  f.). 

2  Ibid.,  t.  IV,  p.  44  (1.  390- 

Ibid.,  t.  V,  p.  23  (1.  197). 

4  Ibid.,  t.  V,  p.  171  (11.  91  ff.). 

^  y_^^^^  f  ^^3^.    Ibid.,  t.  V,  p.  11  (1-  265). 

6  Ibid.,  t.  V,  p.  40  (1.  287). 

^--lijiz^v^^-  ^^'•^•' p- 45 (!•  306). 

8  —  ^Jl  CSW]  ^-  ^^'■^•'  ^-  ^^'  P-  51  ^^-  450; 
t.  Ill,  p.  208  (1. 234). 

9  Ibid.,  t.  V,  p.  46  (I.  307). 
10  Ibid,  t.  VII,  p.  168  (1.  452). 

"  Ibid.,  t.  Ill,  p.  208  (1. 233),  n  ^  '^  • 


-  Ibid.,  t.  IV.  p.  49  (1.  430),   (j  ^  -f  ^^  P 


A^*V^/V^     ^WW^wN 


The  Doctrine  of  Eternal  Life  87 

The  place  of  the  deceased  in  heaven  is  by  the  side  of 
God  ^  in  the  most  holy  place, ^  and  he  becomes  God  and 
an  angel  of  God  ;  ^  he  himself  is  a  speaker  of  the  truth,* 
and  his  Ka  is  triumphant.^  He  sits  on  a  great  throne  by 
the    side   of   God.^      The    throne    is    of  iron,  or  alabaster, 


1  ^^  \ X)    H     J^U  / I  un-k  ar  kes  tieter.    Recueil  de  Travaux, 

A/WN/SA  <!-__->  I  I 

t.  Ill,  p.   202  (1.   209). 

2  n  AAAAA^  (  9  0  0  I  <rz>  n  '=^  AAAAAA  1  c  <;!=>  (1  ^  V_^ .     Il>id.,  t.  V, 

p.  189(1. 178).  


3 

(1- 175) 


4 


^    I  ntaa-kheru.    Ibid.,  t.  V,  p.  i86  (1.  172).    These  words 

are  in  later  times  always  added  after  the  name  of  the  deceased,  and  seem 
to  mean  something  like  "  he  whose  voice,  or  speech,  is  right  and  true " ; 
the  expression  has  been  rendered  by  "disant  la  verite,"  "veridique," 
"juste,"  "justifie,"  "vainqueur,"  "waltend  des  Wortes,"  "  machtig  der 
Rede,"  "vrai  de  voix,"  "juste  de  voix,"  "victorious,"  "  triumphant,"  and 
the  like.  See  on  this  subject  Maspero,  Etudes  de  Mythologie  et  (TArcheologie, 
t.  I,  pp.  93-114;  Deveria,  V Expression  Mad-xerou  ijj\  Reaieil  de  Travaux^ 
t.  I,  pp.  10  ff.).  As  to  the  general  meaning  of  madkheni  there  can  be  no 
doubt.  When  Set  made  accusations  against  Osiris,  which  Osiris  denied,  the 
gods  of  Anu  tried  Osiris  to  find  out  which  of  the  two  was  speaking  the  truth. 
Thoth  proved  conclusively  that  Osiris  was  innocent  of  the  charges  made  by 
Set,  and  therefore  that  he  was  niadkheru,  i.e.,  true  of  word,  or  truth-speaker, 
or  innocent.  A  somewhat  different  view  of  the  signification  of  niadkheru  is 
given  by  Virey  {Tombeau  de  Rekhmara,  Paris,  1889,  p.  loi.  Published  in 
Me  moires  publics  par  les  Membres  de  la  Miss.  Arch.  Erafi^aise  au  Caire, 
t.  V,  fasc.  I).  The  offerings  which  were  painted  on  the  walls  of  the  tomb 
were  actually  enjoyed  by  the  deceased  in  his  new  state  of  being.  The 
Egyptians  called  them  '•'■per  kheru"  that  is  to  say,  "  the  things  which  the 
word  or  the  demand  made  to  appear,^'  or  '■'■per  hru  kkeru,"  that  is  to  say, 
"  the  things  which  presented  the  )n  selves  at  the  tcwd"  or  "at  the  demand"  of 
the  deceased.  The  deceased  was  then  called  "  maakheru"  that  is  to  say, 
"he  who  realizes  his  word"  or  ^'^ he  who  realizes  while  he  speaks,"  or  " ivhose 
voice  or  defnatid  realizes,"  or  "  whose  voice  or  demand  makes  true,  or  makes  to 
be  really  afid  actually  "  that  which  only  appears  in  painting  on  the  walls  of 
the  tomb.  M.  Amelineau  combats  this  interpretation,  and  agrees  with 
M.  Maspero's  rendering  of  "Juste  de  voix  ";  see  Un  Tombeau  Egyptien  (in 
Revue  de  PHistoire  des  Religions),  t.  XXIII,  pp.  153,  154. 
5  Ibid.,  t.  V,  p.  189  (1.  179). 

p.  58  (1.  494). 


88  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

ornamented  with  lions'  faces  and  having  the  hoofs  of  bulls.^ 
He  is  clothed  in  the  finest  raiment,  like  unto  the  raiment  of 
those  who  sit  on  the  throne  of  living  right  and  truth. -^  He 
receives  the  Urrt  Crown  from  the  gods,^  and  from  the 
Great  Company  of  the  Gods  of  Anu,'*  He  thirsts  not, 
nor  hungers,  nor  is  sad  ;  ^  he  eats  the  bread  of  Ra  and 
drinks  what  he  drinks  daily,''  and  his  bread  also  is  that 
which  is  the  word  of  Keb,  and  that  which  comes  forth 
from  the  mouths  of  the  gods.'''  He  eats  what  the  gods  eat, 
he  drinks  what  they  drink,  he  lives  as  they  live,  and  he 
dwells  where  they  dwell ;  ^  all  the  gods  give  him  their  food 
that  he  may  not  die.^  Not  only  does  he  eat  and  drink  of 
their  food,  but  he  wears  the  apparel  which  they  wear,^*^  the 
white  linen  and  sandals  ;  ^^  he  is  clothed  in  white,^^  and 
'*  he  eoeth  to  the  ereat  lake  in  the  midst  of  the  F'ield  of 
"  Offerings  whereon  the  great  gods  sit ;  and  these  great  and 
"  never-failing  gods  give  unto  him  [to  eat]  of  the  tree  of 

"  life  of  which  they  themselves  do  eat  |  n  v\  ^^^^^  ■¥■ 

"t  ®^  [1  'vw^/vv  \\  ^v    ^^      that   he    likewise    may    live."  ^^ 

The    bread    which    he    eats    never    decays,    and    his    beer 


A  '^ 


^       f^ f?  f^'     ^^'^"^^^ ^^  Travaux,  t.  VII,  p.  154  (11.  309,  310). 
2  Il?id.,  t.  V,  p.  148  (1.  239).  3  //;/^.^  t,  IV,  p.  56  (1.  480). 

4  md.,  t.  V,  p.  176  (1.  117).  *  Ibid.,  t.  Ill,  p.  195  (1.  172). 

6  Ibid.,  t.  V,  p.  52  (1.  335). 

Ibid.,  t.  Ill,  p.  208  (1.  234). 


«  Ibid.,  t.  Ill,  p.  198  (11.  191  f.). 
9  Ibid.,  t.  V,  p.  164  (1.  56). 

p.  190  (1. 180). 

A  AA/SA/NA 

12  Ibid.,  t.  IV,  p.  45  (1.  394).  13  y^/^.^  t.  VII,  p.  165  (1.  430). 


The  Doctrine  of  Eternal  Life  89 

never  grows  stale. ^  He  eats  of  the  "bread  of  eternity" 
and  drinks  of  the  "  beer  of  everlastin^j^ness  "  which  the  gods 
eat  and  drink  ; "  and  he  nourishes  himself  upon  that  bread 
which  the  Eye  of  Horus  has  shed  upon  the  branches  of  the 
olive  tree.^  He  suffers  neither  hunger  nor  thirst  like  the 
gods  Shu  and  Tefnut,  for  he  is  filled  with  the  bread  of 
wheat  of  which  Horus  himself  has  eaten  ;  and  the  four 
children  of  Horus,  Hapi,  Tuamutef,  Oebhsenuf,  and  Amset, 
have  appeased  the  hunger  of  his  belly  and  the  thirst  of  his 
lips.*  He  abhors  the  hunger  which  he  cannot  satisfy,  and 
he  loathes  the  thirst  which  he  cannot  slake  ;  ^  but  he  is 
delivered  from  the  power  of  those  who  would  steal  away  his 
food.*^  He  is  washed  clean,  and  his  Ka  is  washed  clean, 
and  they  eat  bread  together  for  ever.'''  He  is  one  of  the 
four  children  of  Horus  who  live  on  right  and  truth, '^  and 
they  give  him  his  portion  of  the  food  with  which  they  have 
been  so  abundantly  supplied  by  the  god  Keb  that  they  have 
never  yet  known  what  it  is  to  hunger.  He  goes  round 
about  heaven  even  as  they  do,  and  he  partakes  of  their  food 
of  figs  and  wine.^ 

Those  who  would  be  hostile  to  the  deceased  become 
thereby  foes  of  the  god  Temu,  and  all  injuries  inflicted  on 
him  are  inflicted  on  that  god  ;^^  he  dwells  without  fear  under 
the  protection  of  the  gods,^^  from  whose  loins  he  has  come 
forth. ^~  To  him  "the  earth  is  an  abomination,  and  he  will 
"  not  enter  into  Keb  ;  for  his  soul  hath  burst  for  ever  the 
"  bonds  of  his  sleep  in  his  house  which  is  upon  earth.  His 
"  calamities  are  brought  to  an  end,  for  Unas  hath  been 
"  purified  with  the  Eye  of  Horus  ;  the  calamities  of  Unas 

a 


Recueil  de  Travaux,  t.  V,  p.  41  (1.  288),  and  t.  VII,  p.  167  (I.  442). 

o  ^H-  ^^'■^•.  t.  VII,  p.  160  (1. 390). 

■'•  Ibid.,  t.  Ill,  p.  199  (1.  200).  ■*  Ibid.,  t.  V,  p.  10  (11.  54ff.). 

">  Ibid.,  t.  Ill,  p.  199  (11.  195  f.).         '^  Ibid.,  t.  IV,  p.  48  (1.  429). 
"  Ibid.,  t.  V,  p.  167  (1.  66).  8  Ibid.,  t.  VIII,  p.  106  (1.  673). 

Ibid.,  t.  VIII,  p.  no  (1.  692).  10  Ibid.,  t.  IV,  p.  74  (1.  602). 

11  Ibid.,  t.  IV,  p.  46  (1.  405).  12  7/,/^,^  t.  Ill,  p.  202  (1.  209). 


90  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

"  have  been  done  away  by  Isis  and  Nephthys.  Unas  is  in 
"  heaven,  Unas  is  in  heaven,  in  the  form  of  air,  in  the  form 
"  of  air  ;  he  perisheth  not,  neither  doth  anything  which  is 
"  in  him  perish.^  He  is  firmly  stabHshed  in  heaven,  and 
"  he  taketh  his  pure  seat  in  the  bows  of  the  bark  of  Ra. 
"  Those  who  row  Ra  up  into  the  heavens  row  him  also,  and 
"  those  who  row  Ra  beneath  the  horizon  row  him  also."  ^ 
The  life  which  the  deceased  leads  is  said  to  be  generally 
that  of  him  "who  entereth  into  the  west  of  the  sky,  and 
who  cometh  forth  from  the  east  thereof"^  In  brief,  the 
condition  of  the  blessed  is  summed  up  in  the  following 
extract  from  the  Pyramid  of  Pepi  I  : — '^ 

"  I.  Hail,  thou  Pepi,  2.  thou  hast  come,  thou  art  a 
"  Spirit-soul,  and  thou  hast  gotten  might  like  the  god, 
"  3.  behold  thou  art  enthroned,  Osiris.  Thy  Heart-soul  is 
•'  with  thee  in  thee,  4.  thy  vital  strength  is  behind  thee. 
"  Thy  6^rr/'  Crown  is  upon  thy  head,  5«  thy  headdress  is 
"  upon  thy  shoulders,  thy  face  is  before  thee,  and  those  who 
"  sing  songs  of  joy  are  upon  6.  both  sides  of  thee  ;  those 
"  who  follow  in  the  train  of  God  are  behind  thee,  and  the 
"  Spirit-bodies  are  upon  each  side  of  thee.  7*  They  cry  out, 
"  The  god  cometh,  the  god  cometh,  Pepi  hath  come  upon 
"  the  throne  of  Osiris.  The  Spirit-soul  who  8.  dwelleth 
"  in  Netat,  the  Power  that  dwelleth  in  Teni,  hath  come. 
"  Isis  speaketh  unto  thee,  Nephthys  holdeth  converse  with 
"  thee,  and  the  9.  Spirit-souls  come  unto  thee  bowing  their 
•'  backs,  they  smell  the  earth  at  thy  feet,  by  reason  of  thy 
"  slaughter,  O  Pepi,  10.  in  the  towns  of  Saa.  Thou  comest 
"  forth  to  thy  mother  Nut,  and  she  graspeth  thy  arm,  and 
"  she  maketh  a  way  for  thee  II.  through  the  sky  to  the 
"  place  where  Ra  abideth.  Thou  hast  opened  the  gates  of 
"  the  sky,  thou  hast  opened  the  doors  of  the  celestial  deep  ; 
"  thou  hast  found  12.  Ra  and  he  protecteth  thee,  he  hath 
"  taken  thee  by  thy  hand,  he  hath  led  thee  into  the  two 
"  halves  of  13.  heaven,  and  he  hath  placed  thee  on  the  throne 

^  Recueil  de  Travaux,  t.  IV,  p.  51  (11.  447  f.). 
2  Ibid.,  t.  V,  p.  53  (1.  340). 

1^  ^  '^  ^-    ^l''d-^  t.  8,  p.  104  (1.  665). 
*  Ibid.,  t.  V,  p.  159  (11.  1-2 1). 


3 


/V\AA^V\ 


The  Doctrine  of  Eternal  Life  91 

"  of  Osiris.  Hail,  O  Pepi  !  The  Eye  of  Horus  came  to 
"  hold  converse  with  thee  ;  14.  thy  soul  which  is  among  the 
"  gods  Cometh  unto  thee  ;  thy  power  which  dwclleth  among 
"  the  Spirit-souls  cometh  unto  thee.  As  a  son  fighteth  for 
"  his  father,  and  as  Horus  fought  for  Osiris,  15.  even  so 
"  doth  Horus  deliver  Pepi  from  the  hand  of  his  enemies. 
"  Stand  up,  avenged,  endowed  with  all  things  like  unto 
"  a  god,  and  equipped  with  16.  the  Form  of  Osiris  upon 
**  the  throne  of  Khent-Amenti.  Thou  doest  that  which  he 
"  doeth  among  the  imperishable  Spirit-souls  ;  17.  thy  son 
"  standeth  upon  thy  throne  being  provided  with  thy  Form, 
"  and  it  doeth  that  which  thou  doest  in  the  presence  of 
"  Him  that  is  the  First  among  the  Living,  by  the  command 
•'  of  Ra,  the  great  god.  18.  He  reapeth  the  wheat,  he 
"  cutteth  the  barley,  and  he  giveth  it  unto  thee.  Hail,  Pepi ! 
"  He  that  hath  given  unto  thee  life  and  all  serenity  for  ever 
"  is  Ra.  19.  Thou  speakest  to  thy  body,  thou  hast  received 
"  the  Form  of  God,  and  thou  hast  become  magnified 
"  thereby  before  the  gods  who  are  at  the  head  of  the  Lake. 
"  Hail,  Pepi,  thy  Heart-soul  standeth  20.  among  the  gods 
"  and  among  the  Spirit-souls,  and  the  fear  of  thee  striketh 
"  into  their  hearts.  Hail,  Pepi !  Stand  up,  Pepi,  on  thy 
"  throne  at  the  head  of  the  21.  living,  thy  slaughter  [striketh 
"  terror]  into  their  hearts.  Thy  name  liveth  upon  earth, 
"  thy  name  shall  flourish  upon  earth,  thou  shalt  neither 
"  perish  nor  be  destroyed  for  ever  and  for  ever." 

Side  by  side  however,  with  the  passages  which  speak 
of  the  material  and  spiritual  enjoyments  of  the  deceased, 
we  have  others  which  seem  to  imply  that  the  Egyptians 
believed  in  a  corporeal  existence,^  or  at  least  in  the  capacity 
for  corporeal  enjoyment,   in  the  future  state.     This  belief 


1  Compare       4     (^   '^•^^ 
Q  ^^  oTT  ^^  —'^    '^^^  "^^  "  O  flesh  of  Teta,  rot  not,  decay  not,  stink 
not."     Reciieil  de    Travaux,  t.  V,  p.  55  (1.  347).      fg  Q  Q  J  1    "vN 

0  (I  ^^      "  Pepi  goeth  forth  with  his  flesh"  ;   I'^id.,  t.  V,  p.  185 

bones  shall  not  be  destroyed,  and  thy  flesh  shall  not  perish  " ;  t'di'd.,  p.  55 
(1-  353). 


92  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

may  have  rested  upon  the  view  that  the  Hfe  in  the  next 
world  was  but  a  continuation  of  the  life  upon  earth,  which 
it  resembled  closely,  or  it  may  have  been  due  to  the  survival 
of  semi-savage  gross  ideas  incorporated  into  the  religious 
texts  of  the  Egyptians.  However  this  may  be,  it  is  quite 
certain  that  in  the  Vth  dynasty  the  deceased  king  Unas 
eats  with  his  mouth,  and  exercises  other  natural  functions  of 
the  body,  and  gratifies  his  passions.^  But  the  most  remark- 
able passage  in  this  connection  is  one  in  the  pyramid  of 
Unas.  Here  all  creation  is  represented  as  being  in  terror 
when  they  see  the  deceased  king  rise  up  as  a  soul  in  the 
form  of  a  god  who  devours  "  his  fathers  and  mothers  "  ;  he 
feeds  upon  men  and  also  upon  gods.  He  hunts  the  gods 
in  the  fields  and  snares  them  ;  and  when  they  are  tied  up 

^  Compare  the  following  passages  : — 


CMDWUZCSlJ^I-^-^q^^^^ 


Recueil  de  Travaux^  t.  IV,  p.  76  (11.  628,629). 


.      Idid.,  t.  V,  p.  37  (1.  277). 


Ihd.,  t.  Ill,  p.  197  (11.  182  f.). 

id)  <==>/\  —  ^y'™^    ^^^1 
\^^^ S^P^ 


IT]  D 
/h'd.,  t.  V,  p.  40  (1.  286),  and  see  M.  Maspero's  note  on  the  same  page 


The  Doctrine  of  Eternal  Life  93 

for  slaughter  he  cuts  their  throats  and  disembowels  them. 
He  roasts  and  eats  the  best  of  them,  but  the  old  gods  and 
goddesses  are  used  for  fuel.      By  eating  them  he  imbibes 

both   their    magical    powers  ^  lJ       and    their   Spirit-souls 

'^^''^j'^, .     He  becomes  the  "  Great  Power,  the  Power 

"  of  Powers,  and  the  god  of  all  the  great  gods  who  exist  in 
"  visible  forms,"  ^  and  he  is  at  the  head  of  all  the  salpi,  or 

Spirit-bodies  in  heaven.      He  carries  off  the  hearts  -^^  5^^ 

of  the  gods,  and  devours  the  wisdom  of  every  god  ;  therefore 
the  duration  of  his  life  is  everlasting  and  he  lives  to  all 
eternity,  for  the  Heart-souls  of  the  gods  and  their  Spirit- 
souls  are  in  him.     The  whole  passage  reads  : — ^ 

"  496.  The  skies  lower,  the  stars  tremble,  497.  the 
Archers  quake,  the  498.  bones  of  Akeru-gods  tremble, 
and  those  who  are  with  them  are  struck  dumb  when  they 
see  499.  Unas  rising  up  as  a  soul,  in  the  form  of  the  god 
who  liveth  upon  his  fathers  and  who  maketh  to  be  his 
food  his  500'  mothers.  Unas  is  the  lord  of  wisdom, 
and  501.  his  mother  knoweth  not  his  name.  The 
adoration  of  Unas  is  in  heaven,  he  hath  become  mighty 
in  the  horizon  502.  like  unto  Temu,  the  father  that  gave 
him  birth,  and  after  Temu  gave  him  birth  503.  Unas 
became  stronger  than  his  father.  The  Doubles  of  Unas 
are  behind  him,  the  sole  of  his  foot  is  beneath  his  feet, 
his  gods  are  over  him,  his  uraei  are  [seated]  504.  upon 
his  brow,  the  serpent  guides  of  Unas  are  in  front  of  him, 
and  the  spirit  of  the  flame  looketh  upon  [his]  soul.  The 
505.  powers  of  Unas  protect  him  ;  Unas  is  a  bull  in 
heaven,  he  directeth  his  steps  where  he  will,  he  liveth 
upon  the  form  which  506.  each  god  taketh  upon  himself, 
and  he  eateth  the  flesh  of  those  who  come  to  fill  their 
bellies  with  the  magical  charms  in  the  Lake  of  Fire. 
Unas  is  507*  equipped  with  power  against  the  Spirit-souls 

Pyramid  of  Teta,  1.  327; 


r-vr-\  .WS     T  rirn  -B^  czsn 
Recueil  de  Travaux,  t.  V,  p.  50. 

2  See    Maspero,    Ibid.,    t.    IV,    p.    59,    t.    V,    p.    50  ;     and     Sethe, 
Pyramidentexte,  Bd.  I,  p.  205. 


94  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

thereof,  and  he  riseth  up  in  the  form  of  the  mighty  one, 
the  lord  of  those  who  dwell  in  power  (?).  Unas  hath 
taken  his  seat  with  his  side  turned  towards  Keb. 
508.  Unas  hath  weighed  his  words  with  the  hidden  god  (?) 
who  hath  no  name,  on  the  day  of  hacking  in  pieces  the 
firstborn.  Unas  is  the  lord  of  offerings,  the  untier  of  the 
knot,  and  he  himself  maketh  abundant  the  offerings  of 
meat  and  drink.  509*  Unas  devoureth  men  and  liveth 
upon  the  gods,  he  is  the  lord  of  envoys,  whom  he  sendeth 
forth  on  his  missions.  '  He  who  cutteth  off  hairy  scalps,' 
who  dwelleth  in  the  fields,  tieth  the  gods  with  ropes  ; 
510.  Tcheser-tep  keepeth  guard  over  them  for  Unas  and 
driveth  them  unto  him  ;  and  the  Cord-master  hath  bound 
them  for  slaughter.  Khonsu  the  slayer  of  the  wicked 
cutteth  their  throats  511.  and  draweth  out  their  intestines, 
for  it  is  he  whom  Unas  sendeth  to  slaughter  ;  and  Shesmu 
cutteth  them  in  pieces  and  boileth  their  members  in  his 
blazing  caldrons  of  the  night.  5^2.  Unas  eateth  their 
magical  powers,  and  he  swalloweth  their  Spirit-souls  ;  the 
great  ones  among  them  serve  for  his  meal  at  daybreak,  the 
lesser  serve  for  his  meal  at  eventide,  and  the  least  among 
them  serve  for  his  meal  in  the  night.  S^3'  The  old  gods 
and  the  old  croddesses  become  fuel  for  his  furnace.  The 
mighty  ones  in  heaven  light  the  fire  under  the  caldrons 
where  are  heaped  up  the  thighs  of  the  firstborn  ;  and  he 
that  maketh  those  who  live  514*  in  heaven  to  go  about  for 
Unas  liorhteth  the  fire  under  the  caldrons  with  the  thiorfis 
of  their  women  ;  he  goeth  round  about  the  Two  Heavens 
in  their  entirety,  and  he  goeth  round  about  the  two  banks 
of  the  Celestial  Nile.  Unas  is  the  Great  Power,  the 
Power  of  Powers,  5l5'  ^^d  Unas  is  the  Chief  of  the  gods 
in  visible  forms.  Whatever  he  findeth  upon  his  path  he 
eateth  forthwith,  and  the  magical  might  of  Unas  is  before 
that  of  all  the  516.  Spirit-bodies  who  dwell  in  the  horizon. 
Unas  is  the  firstborn  of  the  firstborn  gods.  Unas  is 
surrounded  by  thousands,  and  oblations  are  made  unto 
him  by  hundreds  ;  he  is  made  manifest  as  the  Great 
Power  by  Sah  (Orion)  517.  the  father  of  the  gods. 
Unas  repeateth  his  rising  in  heaven  and  he  is  crowned 
lord  of  the  horizon.  He  hath  reckoned  up  the  bandlets 
and  the  arm-rings,  he  hath  taken  possession  of  the  hearts 
of  the  gods.     5^S.    Unas  hath  eaten  the  Red  Crown,  and 


The  Doctrine  of  Eternal  Life  95 

he  hath  swallowed  the  White  Crown  ;  the  food  of  Unas 
is  the  intestines,  and  his  meat  is  hearts  and  their  words  of 
power.  519.  Behold,  Unas  eateth  of  that  which  the  Red 
Crown  sendeth  forth,  he  increaseth,  and  the  words  of 
power  of  the  gods  are  in  his  belly  ;  520.  his  attributes  are 
not  removed  from  him.  Unas  hath  eaten  the  whole  of 
the  knowledge  of  every  god,  and  the  period  of  his  life  is 
eternity,  and  the  duration  of  his  existence  is  521.  ever- 
lastingness  in  the  form  of  one  who  doeth  what  he  wisheth, 
and  doth  not  do  what  he  hateth,  and  he  abideth  in  the 
horizon  for  ever  and  ever  and  ever.  The  Soul  of  the 
gods  is  in  Unas,  their  Spirit-souls  are  with  522.  Unas, 
and  the  offerings  made  unto  him  are  more  than  those 
which  are  made  unto  the  gods.  The  fird  of  Unas  523.  is 
in  their  bones,  for  their  soul  is  with  Unas,  and  their 
shades  are  with  those  who  belong  unto  them.  524.  Unas 
hath  been  with  the  two  hidden  (?)  Kha(.'*)  gods  who  are 

without  power  (?) 525.  ;   the   seat   of  the 

heart  of  Unas  is  among  those  who  live  upon  this  earth 
for  ever  and  ever  and  ever." 

The  notion  that,  by  eating  the  flesh,  or  particularly  by 
drinking  the  blood,  of  another  living  being,  a  man  absorbs 
his  nature  or  life  into  his  own,  is  one  which  appears  amono- 
primitive  peoples  in  many  forms.  It  lies  at  the  root  of  the 
wide-spread  practice  of  drinking  the  fresh  blood  of  enemies — 
a  practice  which  was  familiar  to  certain  tribes  of  the  Arabs 
before  Muhammad,  and  which  tradition  still  ascribes  to  the 
wild  race  of  Cahtan — and  also  of  the  habit  practised  by 
many  savage  huntsmen  of  eating  some  part  (^.^.,  the  liver) 
of  dangerous  carnivora,  in  order  that  the  courage  of  the 
animal  may  pass  into  them.  The  flesh  and  blood  of  brave 
men  also  are,  among  semi-savage  or  savage  tribes,  eaten 
and  drunk  to  inspire  courage.  But  the  idea  of  hunting, 
killing,  roasting  and  eating  the  gods  as  described  above  is 
not  apparently  common  among  ancient  nations  ;  the  main 
object  of  the  dead  king  in  doing  this  was  to  secure  the 
eternal  life  which  was  the  peculiar  attribute  of  the  gods.^ 
The  text  of  the  passage  describing  the  cannibalism  of  Unas 
is  as  follows  : — 

^  Cannibalism  among  the  Egyptians  is  discussed  at  length  in  my  Osiris 
afid  the  Egyptian  Resurrection,  2  vols.     London,  1910. 


COO 


96  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

496.  ^ir^^lliq.*.  497.^1^51^-^ 

CMP]  k^l^l^kVc^  ^0-  ir  fl^ 

503.  {&m  i^^\^\\'Z.'^i^^^\ 

505.  ^^- 111 CMQ  TkSCMI]  -^^^ 
or^TPlo(l507.ii:=^^-.JiVVV 


.  0  .   ^  


The  Doctrine  of  Eternal  Life 


97 


A/VsAAA 
/■/\A/sAA 


^"-  e  z  ^i-  r  p  -"  oM  °^  ra^  J  ^^ 


AA/VA/VA 
/VNAAAA 


zX\z^z^ 


I   512.  C^TP]  o  I]  -|> 


AA/^AAA 
AA/VV\A 


n  ^ 


^-^ZP"^fl-^l^^^=^^'^ 


J3 


-^  [SW]    C3oP^  ^^  (jo    ^  ^  /X\ 


1!I?^^^H(1^-J 


(\A/WV\    AAAAAA    ^-s       ^-^  ,^^ 


]^1^ 


^ 


ss* 


l^k^v^l^ 


VOL.   I. 


H 


98  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 


A/^/\/\A 


°^^ru-^%i^muizmp 


^kk  P--I^  (MB  kz:  ^^-k 


,-JU. 


/SAAA/V\ 


f!r-iii^-a-(BD  ^^3.  kill 

"q^^P^  524.  i\\  r^wi  k w  ^ 


fl a 


Egyptian  Ideas  about  God  and  the  "Gods"     99 


EGYPTIAN    IDEAS    ABOUT    GOD 
AND    THE    "GODS" 

To  the  great  and  supreme  Power  which  made  the 
heavens,  the  gods,  the  earth,  the  sea,  the  sky,  men  and 
women,  birds,  animals  and  creeping  things,  all  that  is  and 
all  that  is  yet  to  come  into  being,  the  Egyptians  gave  the 

name    of  fte^er      ^^      |,    or    nether   s=>   j,    a   word    which 

survives  in  Coptic  under  the  form  nuti  worcX.  This  word 
has  been  translated  "god-like,"  "holy,"  "divine,"  "sacred," 
"power,"  "strength,"  "force,"  "strong,"  "fortify,"  "mighty," 
"  protect,"  but  it  is  quite  impossible  to  be  certain  that  any 
word  which  we  may  use  represents  the  meaning  of  neter, 
because  no  one  knows  exactly  what  idea  the  ancient 
Egyptians  attached  to  the  word.  The  truth  is  that  the 
exact  meaning  of  neter  was  lost  at  a  very  early  period  of 
Egyptian  history,  and  even  the  Coptic  does  not  help  us  to 
recover  it.  It  has  been  asserted  that  the  meaning  oi  neter 
is  "  strong,"  but  this  is  clearly  a  derived  and  not  an  original 
meaning.  The  late  Dr.  Brugsch  defined  neter  to  mean 
"  the  active  power  which  produces  and  creates  things  in 
"  regular  recurrence  ;  which  bestows  new  life  upon  them, 
"  and  gives  back  to  them  their  youthful  vigour,"^  and  he 
adds  that  the  innate  conception  of  the  word  completely 
covers  the  original  meaning  of  the  Greek  ^vcrt?  and  the 
Latin  natiira.  Such  views  about  the  meaning  of  neter  may 
well  have  been  held  by  the  cultured  and  philosophical 
Greek,  but  their  abstract  character  puts  them  out  of  the 
range  of  the  mind  of  the  native  Egyptian,  which  was 
incapable  naturally  of  formulating  ideas  of  this  kind.  The 
difficulty  that  surrounds  the  meaning  of  neter  is  further 
increased  by  the  manner  in  which  the  Egyptians  used  the 
word,  for  in  texts  of  all  periods  it  is  used  for  God,  and  also  for 
any  being  who  was  thought  to  possess  some  divine  attribute 
or  characteristic.      Thus  the  great  cosmic  powers,  and  the 

^  Die  thatige  Kraft,  welche  in  periodischer  Wiederkehr  die  Dinge 
erzeugt  und  erschafft,  ihren  neues  Leben  verleiht  und  die  Jugendfrische 
zuriick  giebt.     Religion  und  Mythologie,  p.  93. 

H    2 


loo  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

beings  who  although  held  to  be  "divine"  were  yet  finite 
and  mortal,  and  were  endowed  by  the  Egyptians  with  love, 
hatred,  and   passions  of  every  sort  and  kind,  were  called 

neteru,  ^^^^^,  or  "j^"],  or  "]"]']  I,  or  ']']']  ^^j,  or 
Jj  I ,    or    ^^^,    or    ^1,    and    the    word    is    translated 

"gods  "  by  Egyptologists.  The  following  extracts  illustrate 
the  use  of  the  word  neter.  To  King  Unas  it  is  said  in  his 
Pyramid  Text  (1.  209)  : — 

1.  "  Thou    art  by   the   side  of  god."     ^^^3:^    \ 

To  King  Teta  it  is  said  in  his  Pyramid  Text  (11.  231,  232). 

2.  "  He  weigheth  words,  behold,  god  he  heareth  the 

••  words,"  s&n^pp^kZik-^i 

3.  "God  hath  called  Teta,"  [j  p \^\\\  0-  --3)- 

In  the  Pyramid  Text  of  Pepi  I  we  have  : — 

4.  "  Thou  hast  received  the  form  of  god,  thou  art 
"  great  therewith  before  the  gods  at  the  head  of  the 

"  Lake  of  Horus,"  ^n  ']-'=^^| qM^'^^ 

4.  "  Hail,  Osiris  Pepi.  These  thy  libations  are 
"  presented  unto  thee,  libations  to  thee  before  Horus 
"  in  thy  name  of  '  Comer  forth  from  the  cool  water' 
"  (or,  from  the  Cataract).  Incense  is  presented  unto 
"  thee,  for  thou  art  god.  Thy  mother  Nut  hath  set 
"  thee  to  be  god  to  thine  enemy  in  thy  name  of  god," 

0  ^cz:::^     I  ^^z::^  /A   ^""^      K^  ^^1=:^  v==^   ^aaaa^  _^    I 

1  (11-  31.  34 


AAAAAA 

0 — =1  


5.   "  This  Pepi  adoreth  god,"    .r^^^"^^  [%\\ 
'     1(1.185). 


Egyptian  Ideas  about  God  and  the  "Gods"   loi 


6.  "  This  Pepi  is  then  god,  the  son  of  god,"  (0^1 

7.  The  officer  Netchemab  says,^  "  I  never  defrauded 
"  anyone  in  respect  of  his  property,  making  him  to 
"  complain  of  me  because  of  it  to  the  god  of  my  town," 

Vi.   '^     I  -wwvv    I  ®   ,   and  again    he    says,    "  Never    did 

"  I  let  any  man  be  afraid  of  one  who  was  stronger  than 
"  himself,  [thereby]  causing  him  to  complain  [of  me] 
"  because  of  it  to  god," 

In  the  first  six  of  these  examples  it  is  possible  to  say 
that  the  g-od  referred  to  in  them  is  :  i.  God.  2.  The  local 
town-god,  or  tribal-god.  3.  Osiris.  4.  Ra  ;  but  whichever 
explanation  be  accepted,  it  is  quite  clear  that  the  writers  of 
these  texts  had  in  their  minds  a  Being  who  stood  to  them 
for  God.  In  the  seventh  example  the  writer  emphasizes 
the  difference  which  he  felt  existed  between  the  town-god 
and  god.  Matters  that  related  to  his  material  possessions 
could  be  dealt  with  by  the  town-god,  but  the  intangible 
terror  which  the  feudal  lord  of  the  day  could  make  to  sink 
into  the  mind  of  the  serf  was  a  matter  which  only  the 
Supreme  Being,  by  whatever  name  He  was  called  at  that 
time,  could  put  right. 

We  may  now  quote  a  series  of  examples  from  the 
Prisse  Papyrus,  which  contain  moral  precepts  attributed  to 
Kaqemna,  who  flourished  in  the  reign  of  Seneferu,  a  king  of 
the  I  Vth  dynasty,  and  to  Ptah-hetep,  who  flourished  in  the 
reign  of  Assa,  a  king  of  the  Vth  dynasty.^ 

^  Sethe,  Urkimdefi,  I,  28. 

2  For  the  hieratic  text  see  Prisse  d'Avennes,  Facsimile  d'un  papyrus 
Egyptien  en  caracteres  hieratiques,  Paris,  1847  j  M.  Jequier,  Le  Papyrus 
Prisse,  Paris,  191 1  ;  Maspero,  Pecueil,  XXXI,  pp.  146  ff.  ;  Budge,  Hieratic 
Papyri,  London,  19 10,  No.  V;  Heath,  Proverbs  of  Aphobis,  London, 
Longman  Brown  &  Co.  [no  date] ;  Chabas,  Rev.  Arch.,  ist  series,  torn.  XV  ; 
Lauth,  Sitzungsberichte  der  KgL  Bayer.  Akad.,  1869,  1870;  Virey,  Les 
Maximes  de  Ptah-hotep,  Paris,  1887  ;  Griffith,  P.S.B.A.,  Vol.  XIII, 
pp.  67-76. 


102 
1.    ^ 


The  Papyrus  of  Ani 


e 


-<s>- 


^  III 


1' 


Not         known  are       the  things    of  the  work  of  god.     (Plate  II,  1.  2.) 


i 


IX£.kS^^i   -P4^ 


Do  not        cause       terror  in  men  ;      [it  is]     opposition 


1' 


[to]  god.     (Plate  IV,  1.  8.) 


'•^^    i 


m 


1' 


The         eating  of  bread         is  under     the  dispensation     of  god. 

(Plate  VII,  1.  2.) 


n 1 n I n 1    -^ 


L-Jl 


If        thou  ploughest     crops  (?)         in         a  field,     hath  given       it 


1' 


god.     (Plate  VII,  1.  5.) 


<2>- 


If      thou  wouldst    be  a         wise  man       beget  thou  a  son 


Mkkfl  1i 


pleasing  to 


god.     (Plate  VII,  1.  11.) 


^^ 


-^   I 
1-^-^  I 


Satisfy  thy  dependants  by  thy  deeds,         it  is  the  act 


l^^i  1' 


of  the       favoured  ones    of  god.     (Plate  XI,  1.  i.) 

7.  "If  having  been  of  no  account,  thou  hast  become  great ; 
"  and,  if  having-  been  poor,  thou  hast  become  rich,  when 
*'  thou  art  governor  of  the  city,  be  not  hard-hearted  because 
"  of   thy   advancement,    because    thou    art    the    governor 

"  of  the  provisions  of  god,"  H  '^^•^  ^^  l\  ^  1  1  i ' 
(Plate  XIII,  1.  8.)  ^^ 


Egyptian  Ideas  about  God  and  the  "Gods"  103 

Beloved    of  god  is  obedience ;     disobedience     is      an  abomination 

I1 


to  god.     (Plate  XVI,  1.  7.) 


1.6.) 


1' 


Verily         a  son         good     is  of    the  giving     of  god.      (Plate  XIV, 


The  followinor  extracts  from  the  Maxims  of  Ani  or 
Khensu-hetep  ^  are  also  very  instructive  ;  these  Maxims 
were  compiled  not  later  than  about  1000  B.C.,  but  it  is  very 
probable  that  many  of  them  are  as  old  as  the  Ancient 
Empire  : — 


1.  "The  god    is    for    magnifying   his  name," 

2.  "  The  house  of  God,  an  abomination  to  it  is  much 
"  speaking.  Pray  thou  with  a  loving  heart,  all  its  words 
"  being  hidden.  He  will  do  thy  business.  He  will  hear 
"  what    thou    sayest,     [and]    will    receive    thy    offerings," 


ftAAAAA 


M\  i-wzi"\n}\ 


^^ 


/2    I   I   I 


1 


ft/NAAAA 


ri:^^ 


(^ 


r  I  I 


O  1  "^  (^  ! 


3.  "  Thy  god  giveth  existence,"    (1  ^       p        I 

4.  "  The    god    judgeth    the    truth," 


'^^z:?^ 


1 


^  See  Mariette,  Papyrus  Egyptien,  Cairo ;  de  Rouge,  Comptes  Rendus, 
Paris,  187 1,  pp.  340-350;  yidi^t^exo,  Journal  de  Paris,  15  Mars,  187 1  ; 
ChsihdiS,  L'Egyptologie,  Chalons,  187 6- 1878;  AmelinesLU,  Morale £g}piienne, 
Paris,  1892. 


I04 


The  Papyrus  of  Ani 


5.  "  [In]  offering  to  thy  god  guard  against  the  things 
"  which  are  abominations  to  him.  Consider  with  thine  eye 
"  his  dispensations.  Devote  thyself  to  the  adoration  of  his 
"  name.  He  giveth  souls  (or  will,  or  strength)  to  millions 
"  of  forms.  He  mao-nifieth  him  that  macrnifieth  him.  The 
"  god  of  this  earth  is  Shu,  the  chief  of  the  horizon.  His 
"  similitudes  are  upon  the  earth,  and  to  these  incense  and 
"  offerings  are  given  daily," 


u 


a      ^  (^  — « —  v? 

Ji*^    ^^11::=^     /WWVA      J\ 


-C2>- 


(2 


U  I 


\n 


^kP^l-J 


"f" 


^111 


\\ 


(S 


I  I  I 


I  I  I    I     I 
^  o 


3S  A fl 


i]nixi,;k 


6.  "  I  gave  thee  to  thy  mother  who  carried  thee  as  she 
carried  thee,  and  without  any  help  from  me  she  carried 
thee — a  heavy  burden.  When  after  thy  months  [in  the 
womb]  thou  wast  born,  she  put  herself  under  the  yoke, 

for  three  years  her  breasts  were  in  thy  mouth 

When  thou  wast  sent  to  school  to  be  taught,  day  by  day 
unfailingly  she  came  to  thy  teacher,  bringing  bread  and 
beer  for  thee  from  her  house.  Now  that  thou  hast 
become  a  young  man,  and  art  married,  and  hast  a  house, 
watch  well  thy  child,  and  bring  him  up  as  thy  mother 
brought  thee  up.  Make  it  not  necessary  for  her  {i.e.,  thy 
mother)  to  suffer,  lest  if  she  lift  up  her  hands  to  God  He 
will    hearken    unto    her    [complaints  and  punish   thee]," 


^=4 


Pz^.^P 


i^    (VAA/VAA 


1 


e 


Egyptian  Ideas  about  God  and  the  "Gods"   105 

7.  "  Give  thyself  to  the  god,  griard  thou  thyself  well  for 
the  g"od  daily,  and  let  to-morrow  be  as  to-day  "  [i.e.,  do 
not  be  strict  one  day  and  lax  the  next), 


ra^^ 


o 


The  following  extract  from  Chapter  CLIV  of  the 
Theban  Recension  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead  throws  much 
light  upon  one  of  the  views  which  the  Egyptians  held  as  to 
the  mortal  nature  of  the  "  gods  ":  "  Preserve  me,  O  Temu, 
"  as  thou  dost  thyself  from  such  decay  as  that  which  thou 
"  workest  on  every  god,  every  goddess,  all  animals,  and  all 
"  creeping' things,  [Each]  passeth  away  when  his  soul  hath 
"  gone  forth  after  his  death  ;  he  perisheth  after  he  hath 
'*  passed  away," 


C>=3^ 


<:irs\      c^ 


As  a  result  of  their  studies  of  Egyptian  texts  many  of 
the  earlier  Egyptologists,  e.g.,  Champollion-Figeac,  de 
Rouge,  Pierret  and  Brugsch,  came  to  the  conclusion  that 
the  dwellers  in  the  Nile  Valley,  from  the  earliest  times, 
believed  in  the  existence  of  one  God,  nameless,  incom- 
prehensible, and  eternal.  They  believed  that  neter  might 
in  many  places  refer  to  God,  and  that  the  plural  neteru, 
"  gods,"  only  indicated  a  class,  or  classes,  of  celestial  beings 
who  possessed  some  attribute  which  is  usually  associated 
with  the  Deity.  In  i860  de  Rouge  wrote  :  "  The  unity  of 
"  a  supreme  and  self-existent  being,  his  eternity,  his 
"  almightiness,  and  external  reproduction  thereby  as 
"  God  ;    the  attributing  of  the  creation   of  the   world  and 


io6  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

"  of  all  living  beings  to  this  Supreme  God  ;  the  immortality 
"  of  the  soul,  completed  by  the  dogma  of  punishment  and 
"  rewards  ;  such  is  the  sublime  and  persistent  base  which, 
"  notwithstanding  all  deviations  and  all  mythological 
"  embellishments,  must  secure  for  the  beliefs  of  the  ancient 
"  Egyptians  a  most  honourable  place  among  the  nations  of 
"  antiquity."^  Nine  years  later  he  developed  this  view,  and 
discussed  "  the  difficulties  of  reconciling  the  belief  in  the 
"  unity  of  God  with  the  polytheism  which  existed  in  Egypt 
"  from  the  earliest  times,"  and  he  repeated  his  conviction 
that  the  Egyptians  believed  in  a  self-existent  God  who  was 
One  Beino-,  who  had  created  man,  and  who  had  endowed 
him  with  an  immortal  soul,  (La  Croyance  a  TUnit^  du 
Dieu  supreme,  a  ses  attributs  de  Createur  et  de  L^gislateur 
de  I'homme  qu'il  a  doue  d'une  ame  immortelle,)-  In  fact, 
de  Rouge  amplified  what  Champollion-Figeac  (relying 
upon  his  brother's  information)  wrote  in  1839:  "The 
"  Egyptian  religion  is  a  pure  monotheism,  which  mani- 
"  fested  itself  externally  by  a  symbolic  polytheism " 
(Iigyptc,  Paris,  1839,  p,  245).  M,  Pierret  adopted  the  view- 
that  the  texts  show  us  that  the  Egyptians  believed  in  One 
infinite  and  eternal  God  who  was  without  a  second,  and 
he  repeats  Champollion's  dictum,'^  But  the  greatest 
supporter  of  the  monotheistic  theory  was  Dr.  Brugsch, 
who  in  his  Religion  unci  Mythologie  (Leipzig,  1885- 
1888)  collected  a  series  of  striking  passages  from  the  texts. 
From  these  the  following  are  selected  : — 

God  is  One  and  only,  and  none  other  existeth  with 
Him. — God  is  the  One,  the  One  who  hath  made  all  things. 
— God  is  a  spirit,  a  hidden  spirit,  the  spirit  of  spirits,  the 
great  spirit  of  the  Egyptians,  the  divine  spirit. — God  is 
from  the  beginning,  and  He  hath  been  from  the  beginning. 
He  hath  existed  from  of  old,  and  was  when  nothing  else  had 
being.  He  existed  when  nothing  else  existed,  and  what 
existeth  He  created  after  He  had  come  into  being.  He  is 
the  Father  of  beofinninQ;s, — God  is  the  eternal  One,  He  is 
eternal  and  infinite,  and  endureth  for  ever  and  aye. — God  is 

^  Etudes  sur  le  Rituel  Fimiraire  des  Anciens  Egypiiens  (in  Rev.  Arch., 
Paris,  i860,  p.  72). 

*  Confcretice  sur  la  Religio?i  des  Anciens  Egyptiens  (in  Anfiales  de 
Philosophic  Chritienne,  s'""*  S^rie,  t.  XX,  Paris,  1869,  pp.  325-337). 

^  Le  Pantheon  Egyptien,  Paris,  i88r,  p,  4. 


Egyptian  Ideas  about  God  and  the  "Gods"   107 

hidden  and  no  man  knoweth  His  form.  No  man  hath  been 
able  to  seek  out  His  likeness  ;  He  is  hidden  to  gods  and 
men,  and  He  is  a  mystery  unto  His  creatures.  No  man 
knoweth  how  to  know  Him. — His  name  remaineth  hidden  ; 
His  name  is  a  mystery  unto  His  children.  His  names  are 
innumerable,  they  are  manifold,  and  none  knoweth  their 
number. — God  is  Truth,  He  liveth  by  Truth,  He  feedeth 
thereon,  He  is  the  Kin^^  of  Truth,  and  He  hath  established 
the  earth  thereupon. — God  is  life,  and  through  Him  only 
man  liveth.  He  giveth  life  to  man,  He  breatheth  the 
breath  of  life  into  his  nostrils. — God  is  father  and  mother, 
the  father  of  fathers  and  the  mother  of  mothers.  He 
begetteth,  but  was  never  begotten  ;  He  produceth,  but  was 
never  produced  ;  He  begat  Himself  and  produced  Himself. 
He  createth,  but  was  never  created.  He  is  the  maker  of 
His  own  form,  and  the  fashioner  of  His  own  body. — God 
Himself  is  existence.  He  endureth  without  increase  or 
diminution,  He  multiplieth  Himself  millions  of  times,  He 
is  manifold  in  forms  and  in  members. — God  hath  made  the 
universe,  and  He  hath  created  all  that  therein  is.  He  is 
the  Creator  of  what  is  in  this  world,  and  of  what  was,  and 
of  what  is,  and  of  what  shall  be.  He  is  the  creator  of  the 
heavens,  and  the  earth,  and  of  the  deep,  and  of  the  water, 
and  of  the  mountains.  God  hath  stretched  out  the 
heavens  and  founded  the  earth. — What  His  heart  {i.e., 
mind)  conceived  straightway  came  to  pass.  When  He  hath 
spoken  it  cometh  to  pass  and  endureth  for  ever. — God  is 
the  father  of  the  Gods.  He  fashioneth  man  and  formeth 
the  gods. — God  is  merciful  unto  those  who  reverence 
Him,  and  He  heareth  him  that  calleth  upon  Him.  God 
knoweth  him  that  acknowledg^eth  Him.  He  rewardeth 
him  that  serveth  Him,  and  He  protecteth  him  that  fol- 
lowteh  Him.^ 

The  above  extracts  were  compiled  by  Brugsch  from 
many  texts,  and  they  are  not  all  of  the  same  date,  but 
several  Hymns  are  extant  in  which  all  the  ideas  expressed 
above  are  embodied,  and  from  one  of  these  we  quote  the 
following  : — 

1  Brugsch,  Religion,  pp.  96-99.  The  whole  Chapter  on  the  Egyptian 
conception  of  God  should  be  read  with  Maspero's  review  of  the  book  in 
La  Myth.  Egyptienne  {Etudes  de  Mythologie,  t.  II,  pp.  189  ff.). 


io8  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

"A  Hymn  to  Amen-Ra,  the  Bull  in  Hellopolis, 
"  president  of  all  the  gods,  beautiful  god,  beloved  one,  the 
"  giver  of  life  and  heat  to  the  young  cattle.  Hail  to 
"  thee,  Amen-Ra,  Lord  of  the  thrones  of  the  Two  Lands, 
"  Governor  in  the  Apts  (Karnak),  Kamutef,  the  prince  of 
"  his  fields,  he  of  the  long  strides.  Governor  of  the  Land 
"  of  the  South,  Lord  of  the  Matchaiu  (Nubians),  Prince  of 
"  Punt,  lord  of  the  heavens,  eldest  son  of  the  earth,  lord  of 
"  things  which  exist,  stablisher  of  things,  stablisher  of  all 
"  things.  One  in  his  times  among  the  gods.  Beautiful 
"  Bull  of  the  Nine  gods.  President  of  all  the  gods,  Lord  of 
"  Truth  (or  Law),  father  of  the  gods,  maker  of  men ; 
"  creator  of  beasts,  lord  of  things  which  exist,  creator  of 
"  the  staff  of  life  (wheat  ? ),  maker  of  the  green  herb 
"  which  nourisheth  the  cattle.  The  Form  made  by 
"  Ptah,  the  beautiful  Child,  the  beloved  one.  The  gods 
"  adore  him,  the  maker  of  things  which  are  below,  and  of 
"  things  which  are  above.  He  shineth  on  Egypt  as 
"  he  saileth  over  the  sky  in  peace.  King  of  the  South  and 
"  North,  Ra,  whose  word  is  truth,  the  Governor  of  the 
"  world,  the  mighty  one  of  valour,  the  lord  of  terror,  the 
'*  chief  who  made  the  world  as  he  made  himself.  His 
*'  forms  are  more  numerous  than  those  of  any  god.  The 
"  gods  rejoice  in  his  bounties,  and  they  praise  him  as  the 
"  god  of  the  horizon,  as  the  god  who  riseth  in  the  horizon  of 
"  fire.  The  gods  love  the  smell  of  him  when  he,  the  eldest- 
"  born  of  the  dew,  cometh  from  Punt,  when  he  traverseth 
"  the  land  of  the  Matchaiu,  the  Beautiful  Face  coming  from 
"  the  Land  of  the  god  {i.e.,  the  South-Eastern  Sudan). 
"  The  gods  cast  themselves  down  at  his  feet  when  they 
"  recognize  His  Majesty,  their  Lord,  the  lord  of  fear, 
"  the  mighty  one  of  victory,  the  mighty  of  Will,  the  lord  of 
"  crowns,  who  maketh  offerings  to  flourish,  and  createth 
"  the  divine  food. 

"  Adorations  be  to  thee,  O  Maker  of  the  gods,  who 
"hast  stretched  out  the  heavens  and  founded  the  earth  ! 
"  The  untiring  Watcher  Menu-Amen,  lord  of  eternity, 
"  maker     of    the     everlastingness,     lord     of    adorations, 

"  Governor  of  the  Apts lord  of  rays,  creator  of 

"  light.  The  gods  acclaim  him,  and  he  stretcheth  out  his 
"  hand  to  him  that  loveth  him.  His  flame  casteth  down 
"  his  enemies,  his  Eye  overthroweth  the  rebels,   it   driveth 


Egyptian  Ideas  about  God  and  the  "Gods"   109 

its  spear  into  the  sky  and  maketh  the  serpent  Nak  to 
vomit  what  it  hath  swallowed. 

"  Hail  to  thee,  Ra,  Lord  of  Truth,  whose  shrine  is 
hidden,  thou  Master  of  the  gods,  thou  god  Khepera  in 
thy  boat ;  at  the  going  forth  of  thy  word  the  gods  sprang 
into  being.  Hail,  Atem,  maker  of  mortals.  However 
many  be  their  forms  he  nourisheth  them,  he  maketh 
the  colour  of  one  to  be  different  from  the  other.  He 
heareth  the  prayer  of  the  oppressed  one,  he  is  kind 
of  heart  to  him  that  calleth  upon  him,  he  delivereth 
the  timid  man  from  the  oppressor,  he  judgeth  between 
the  mighty  and  the  weak.  He  is  the  Lord  of 
Knowledge,  and  Wisdom  is  the  utterance  of  his  mouth. 
At  his  will  the  Nile  appeareth,  when  the  greatly- 
beloved  Lord  of  the  palm-tree  cometh  he  maketh 
mortals  to  live.  He  furthereth  every  work,  he  worketh 
in  heaven,  he  produceth  the  beneficent  light ;  the  gods 
rejoice  in  his  beautiful  deeds,  and  their  hearts  live  when 

they    see    him His    name    is    hidden    from    his 

children     in    his    name    '  Amen ' Beloved    art 

thou  as  thou  passest  through  Egypt.  When  thou 
risest  thou  sendest  forth  light  from  thy  beautiful  Eyes 
{i.e.,  Sun  and  Moon).  The  dead  of  olden  times  {pcif) 
rejoice  when  thou  shinest.  When  thou  shinest  in  thy 
full  strength  the  cattle  languish.  Beloved  art  thou  when 
thou  art  in  the  northern  sky,  pleasant  art  thou  when  thou 
art  in  the  southern  sky.  Thy  beauties  seize  and  carry 
away  all  hearts,  the  love  of  thee  maketh  the  arms  to 
drop,  thy  beautiful  deeds  make  the  hands  to  tremble,  all 
hearts  melt  at  the  sight  of  thee,  O  Form,  One,  creator 
of  all  things,  O  One,  Only,  maker  of  things  which 
are.  Men  came  forth  from  his  eyes,  the  gods  sprang  into 
being  at  the  utterance  of  his  mouth.  He  maketh  the 
green  herb  whereon  the  catde  live,  and  the  staff  of  life 
(wheat,  or  barley)  whereon  men  live.  He  maketh  the 
fish  to  live  in  the  rivers,  and  the  feathered  fowl  in 
the  sky.  He  giveth  life  to  that  which  is  in  the  ^%^, 
he  maketh  birds  of  all  kinds  to  live,  and  the  reptiles 
which  crawl  and  spring.  He  maketh  the  rats  (or  mice) 
in  their  holes  to  live,  and  the  birds  which  are  on  every 
green  twig.  Hail  to  thee,  O  thou  maker  of  all  these 
things,  thou  Only  One.     In  his  mightiness    he    taketh 


I  lo  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

"  many  forms.  He  watcheth  over  all  people  as  they 
"  sleep.  He  careth  for  the  welfare  of  his  animal  creation. 
"  O  Amen,  thou  stablisher  of  all  things,  O  Atmu,  O 
"  Heru-Khuti,  all  people  adore  thee,  saying,  '  Praise  be  to 
"  thee  because  thou  dvvellest  among  us,  [we  pay]  homage 
"  to  thee  because  thou  hast  created  us.'  All  creatures 
"  cry  out  to  thee  '  Hail,'  and  all  lands  praise  thee.  From 
"  the  highest  heights  of  heaven  to  the  uttermost  parts 
"  of  the  earth  and  to  the  lowest  depths  of  the  sea  thou 
*'  art  praised.  The  gods  bow  down  before  Thy  Majesty 
"  and  exalt  the  souls  of  their  Creator.  They  rejoice 
"  when  they  meet  their  begetter,  and  they  say  unto  thee, 
"  '  Come  in  peace  !  (i.e.,  Welcome  !)  O  father  of  the  fathers 
"  of  all  the  gods,  who  hast  spread  out  the  sky,  who  hast 
"  founded  the  earth,  who  hast  made  the  things  which 
"  are,  who  hast  created  the  things  which  shall  be,  thou 
"  Prince,  thou  Life,  thou  Health,  thou  Strength,  the 
"  First  among  the  gods.  We  adore  thy  Souls,  for  thou 
"  didst  make  us.  Thou  didst  make  us.  Thou  hast  sfiven 
"  birth  to  us,  and  we  ascribe  praise  unto  thee  because 
"  thou  dwellest  among  us.' 

"  Hail  to  thee,  maker  of  all  things.  Lord  of  Truth, 
"  father  of  the  gods,  maker  of  man,  creator  of  animals, 
"  lord  of  grain,  who  makest  the  beasts  on  the  hills  to 
"  live.  Hail,  Bull  Amen,  Beautiful  Face !  Thou  art 
"  beloved  in  the  Apts,  thou  art  the  mighty  one  who 
"  art  crowned  in  thy  shrine,  thou  art  doubly  crowned 
"  in  Heliopolis,  [where]  thou  didst  judge  between  Horus 
"  and  Set  in  the  Great  Hall.  Thou  art  the  Head  of  the 
"  Great  Company  of  the  gods,  the  Only  One,  who  hast 
"  no  second,  the  Head  of  the  Apts.  Thou  art  the  god 
"  Ani,  Head  of  the  Company  of  thy  gods,  living  on  Truth 
"(or,  by  Law)  Heru-Khuti  of  the  East!  Thou  hast  at 
*'  thy  Will  created  the  mountains,  and  the  silver,  and  the 
"  gold,  and  the  real  lapis-lazuli  [therein].  Incense  and 
"  fresh  myrrh  are  set  before  thy  nose,  O  Beautiful  Face, 
"  as  thou  comest  from  the  land  of  the  Matchaiu  (Nubians). 
"  O  Amen-Ra,  Lord  of  the  thrones  of  the  Two  Lands, 
"  Head  of  the  Apts,  thou  Ani,  Head  of  thy  shrine.  King 
"  One,  among  the  gods.  Thy  names  are  myriad,  they 
"  cannot  be  told.  Thou  risest  in  the  east  and  thou  settest 
"  in  the  west,  and  dost  overthrow  thy  enemies  when  thou 


Egyptian  Ideas  about  God  and  the  "Gods"   1 1 1 

'  art  born  daily.  Thoth  exalteth  thy  two  Eyes  (the  Sun 
'  and  Moon),  and  maketh  thee  to  dwell  in  splendour. 
'  The  gods  rejoice  in  thy  beauties,  which  those  who  are 
'  in  thy  trainexalt.  Thou  art  the  lord  of  the  Sektet  Boat 
'  and  of  the  Atet  Boat,  which  travel  over  the  sky  with  thee 
'  in  peace.  Thy  sailors  rejoice  when  they  see  Nak  over- 
'  thrown,  his  limbs  stabbed  with  the  knife,  the  fire 
'  devouring  him,  his  accursed  soul  beaten  out  of  his 
'  accursed  body,  and  his  feet  cut  off.  The  gods  rejoice, 
'  Ra  is  satisfied,  and  Anu  (Heliopolis)  is  glad  that  the 
'  enemies  of  Atem  are  overthrown ;  the  heart  of  the 
'  goddess  Nebt-Ankh  rejoiceth  because  the  enemies  of  her 
'  lord  are  destroyed."^ 

Another  very  interesting  collection  of  the  attributes  of 
Amen-Ra  is  found  in  one  of  the  funerary  papyri  which  were 
written  for  the  Princess  Nesi-Khensu,  at  the  beginning  of 
the  tenth  century  before  Christ.^  It  forms  the  introductory 
paragraph  of  a  very  remarkable  agreement  concluded 
between  the  princess  and  the  god,  who  undertook  to  grant 
certain  favours  to  her  in  the  Other  World  in  return  for  the 
zeal  and  devotion  which  she  had  shown  in  her  faithful 
service  of  the  god.  The  text  reads  :  "  This  holy  god,  the 
lord  of  all  the  gods,  Amen-Ra;  the  lord  of  the  Throne  of 
the  Two  Lands,  the  governor  of  Apt ;  the  holy  soul  who 
came  into  being  in  the  beginning  ;  the  great  god  who  Hveth 

upon  Truth  ;    the  First  God  of  primeval  time,   ^^^^^ 


^  ®  5^  n^  '  '^^^  produced  the  Ancient  Gods, 
2^  ^.  S  "f^  '^  ' '  ^^^  being  through  whom  every  [other] 
god  hath  existence  ;  the  One  One      i        i        jj  who  hath 

made  everything  which  hath  come  into  existence  since 
primeval  time  when  the  world  was  created  ;  the  being 
whose  birth  is  hidden,  whose  evolutions  are  manifold,  whose 
growth  is  incomprehensible ;  the  holy  form,  beloved,  terrible, 
and  mighty  in  his  risings  ;  the  lord  of  space  {?),  the  Power, 
Khepera    who  createth  every   evolution   of   his  existence, 

^  For  the  text  see  Marielte,  Les  Papyrus  Egyptiens  du  Musie  de  Boulaq^ 
Plates  11-13,  and  see  the  edition  by  Grebaut,  Hymne  a  Amon-Rd, 
Paris,  1875. 

^  See  Maspero,  Les  Momies  Royales  de  Deir  al-J3ahari,  pp.  594  f. 


1 1 2  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

except  whom  at  the  beginning  none  other  existed  ;  who  at 
the  dawn  of  primeval  time  was  Atmu,  the  prince  of  light 
and  splendour ;  who  having  made  himself  [made]  all  men 
to  live  ;  who  saileth  over  the  celestial  regions  and  faileth 
not  ;  whose  ordinances  are  permanent  at  dawn  to-morrow  ; 
who  though  an  aeed  bein"-  showeth  in  the  form  of  one  that 

O  O  »^  .  . 

is  young  ;  who  leadeth  the  uttermost  parts  of  eternity,  gomg 
round  about  the  celestial  regions,  and  journeying  through 
the  Tuat  to  illumine  the  Two  Lands  which  he  hath 
created  ;  the  god  who  acteth  as  God,  who  fashioned  himself, 
who  made  the  heavens  and  the  earth  by  his  will  (or, 
thought) ;  the  greatest  of  the  great,  the  mightiest  of  the 
mighty,  the  Prince  who  is  mightier  than  the  gods,  the 
young  Bull  with  horns  ready  to  gore  ;  the  Protector  of  the 
Two  Lands  in  his  mighty  name  of  '  Everlasting  One  who 
cometh  and  possesseth  his  might ' ;  who  bringeth  the 
remotest  limit  of  eternity  ;  the  god-prince  who  hath  been 
prince  from  the  time  that  he  came  into  being  ;  the  conqueror 
of  the  Two  Lands  through  his  might  ;  the  terrible  one  of 
the  double  Divine  Face  ;  the  divine  aged  one,  the  divine 
form  who  dwelleth  in  the  forms  of  all  the  gods  ;  the  Lion- 
god  with  the  awesome  eye,  the  sovereign  who  sendeth  forth 
the  two  Eyes  (the  sun  and  moon),  the  lord  of  flame  opposing 
his  enemies  ;  the  god  Nu,  the  prince  who  advanceth  at  his 
hour  to  vivify  that  which  cometh  forth  from  his  potter's 
wheel ;  the  disk  of  the  Moon-god  who  openeth  a  way  both 
in  heaven  and  upon  earth  for  the  beautiful  form  ;  the 
beneficent  god,  the  untiring  one,  vigorous  of  heart  in  rising 
and  in  setting ;  from  whose  divine  eyes  men  and  women 
came  forth,  at  the  utterance  of  whose  mouth  the  gods  came 
into  being,  and  food  is  created,  and  celestial  food  is  made, 
and  all  things  [are  made]  which  come  into  being  ;  traverser 
of  eternity,  the  aged  one  who  reneweth  his  youth  ;  who 
possesseth  myriads  of  pairs  of  eyes  and  innumerable  pairs  of 
ears,  whose  light  is  the  guide  of  the  god  of  millions  of  years  ; 
the  lord  of  life,  who  giveth  unto  whom  he  pleaseth  the  circuit 
of  the  earth  along  with  the  seat  of  his  divine  face  ;  who 
setteth  out  upon  his  journey  and  suffereth  no  mishap  by  the 
way,  whose  work  none  can  destroy  ;  the  lord  beloved,  whose 
name  is  sweet  and  beloved,  unto  whom  mankind  make 
supplication  at  dawn  ;  the  mighty  one  of  victory,  the  mighty 
one  of  two-fold  strength  ;  the  lord  who  inspireth  fear,   the 


Egyptian  Ideas  about  God  and  the  "Gods"    1 13 

young  Bull  who  maketh  an  end  of  the  hostile  ones,  the 
mighty  one  who  doeth  battle  with  his  foes,  through  whose 
divine    plans   the   earth   came   into  being  ;    the   Soul    who 

giveth  light  from  his  two  Eyes ;  the  god  Baiti,  J  A^  QQ  "^  w)' 

who  createth  the  divine  transformations  ;  the  holy  one  who 
cannot  be  comprehended,  the  king  who  maketh  kings  to 
rule,  who  girdeth  up  the  earth  in  its  courses  ;  the  god  to 
whose  souls  the  gods  and  goddesses  pay  homage  by  reason 
of  the  greatness  of  the  terror  which  he  inspireth  ;  since  he 
hath  gone  before  that  which  followeth  shall  endure  ;  the 
creator  of  the  world  by  his  secret  counsels  ;  god  Khepera, 
incomprehensible,  who  is  the  most  hidden  of  the  gods, 
whose  deputy  is  the  solar  disk  ;  the  one  incomprehensible, 
who  hideth  himself  from  that  which  cometh  forth  from  him  ; 
the  flame  which  sendeth  forth  rays  of  light  with  mighty 
splendour  ;  who  is  seen  in  form  and  observed  at  his  appear- 
ance, yet  cannot  be  understood  ;  to  whom  at  dawn  men 
make  supplications  ;  whose  risings  are  like  crystal  among 
the  company  of  the  gods,  who  art  beloved  of  every  god  ; 
who  is  hidden  in  the  North  wind  which  Nut  bringeth 
forward  ;  who  maketh  decrees  for  millions  of  millions  of 
years,  whose  ordinances  stand  fast  and  are  not  destroyed, 
whose  utterances  are  gracious,  whose  statutes  fail  not  in 
his  appointed  season ;  who  giveth  duration  of  life  and 
doubleth  the  years  of  those  unto  whom  he  hath  a  favour, 
who  graciously  protecteth  him  whom  he  hath  set  in  his 
heart  ;  who  hath  formed  eternity  and  everlastingness  ;  the 
king  of  the  South  and  of  the  North,  Amen-Ra,  the  king  of 
the  gods,  the  lord  of  heaven,  and  of  the  earth,  and  of  the 
Tuat,  and  of  the  two  mountains  ;  in  whose  form  the  earth 
began  to  exist,  the  mighty  one,  who  is  pre-eminent  among 
all  the  gods  of  the  Great  First  Company  of  the  gods." 

After  reading  the  above  extracts  it  is  impossible  not  to 
conclude  that  the  ideas  of  the  ancient  Egyptians  about  God 
were  of  a  very  exalted  character,  and  it  is  clear  that  they 
made  in  their  minds  a  sharp  distinction  between  God  and 
the  "gods."  Several  passages  in  the  Theban  Recension  of 
the  Book  of  the  Dead  prove  that  under  the  XVIIIth  dynasty, 
about  1600  B.C.,  they  believed  that  there  was  a  time  when 
the  god  Tem  existed  by  himself,  and  that  it  was  he  who, 
by  a  series  of  efforts  of  his  mind,  created  the  heavens  and 

VOL.   I.  I 


114  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

the  earth,  and  orods  and  men,  and  every  creature  which  has 
life.  It  was  believed  that  he  was  self-created  and  self- 
existent,  and  that  he  was  One  Only,      i        i         j]  ,  and  the 

texts,  as  will  be  seen  later  on,  state  clearly  that  there  was 
none  with  him,  and  that  he  was  quite  alone  when  he  arrived 
at  the  decision  to  create  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  and 
gods  and  men.  The  gods  proceeded  from  his  body,  and 
men  from  the  words  of  his  mouth.  Here,  then,  we  have  One 
God  who  was  self-created,  self-existent,  and  almii^hty,  who 
created  the  universe.  According  to  the  LXXVIIIth 
Chapter  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead,  and  the  other  Chapters 
of  Transformations,  he  possessed  a  dual-soul,  i.e.,  a  Kiiu 
and  a  Ba,  and  the  element  in  which  these  lived  was  thought 
to  be  the  great  mass  of  Celestial  Waters  which  the  Egyptians 

called  Nu,  ^^^^  j)  •     The  first  act  of  creation  was  the 


sending  forth  from  Nu  of  the  ball  of  the  sun,  i.e.,  the  creation 
of  light.  Temu  evolved  the  thought  in  Nu,  and  when  the 
thought  was  expressed  in  a  word,  or  words,  the  sun  appeared 
as  the  result.  Every  succeeding  act  of  creation  represented 
a  thought  of  Temu  and  its  expression  in  words,  which 
probably  took  the  form  of  commands.  The  God  of  the  Sun 
was,  under  the  second  half  of  the  period  of  the  Ancient 
Empire,  called  Ra,  but  it  is  very  probable  that  Ra  was 
identified  with  Temu  at  an  early  date,  and  that  to  the 
creature  was  paid  the  worship  due  to  the  Creator.  The 
material  sun,  or  the  body  of  the  sun,  was  worshipped  as  the 
source  of  all  heat,  and  light,  and  life  by  many  Egyptians, 
especially  under  the  political  influence  of  the  priests  of 
Ra  at  Heliopolis,  which  began  first  to  assume  great 
importance  towards  the  close  of  the  IVth  dynasty ;  but  at  all 
times  there  must  have  existed  those  whose  minds  were  able 
to  separate  the  body  of  the  sun  from  its  spirit  and  soul, 
which  were  the  direct  emanations  of  Temu. 

The  greater  number  of  the  Egyptians,  like  the  peoples 
of  Africa  in  later  times,  were  well  content  to  admit  the 
existence  of  a  great,  almighty  God  who  created  the  universe 
and  all  in  it,  but  they  seem  to  have  thought,  also  like 
modern  African  peoples,  that  he  was  too  great  and  too 
remote  to  concern  himself  with  the  affairs  of  man,  and  that 
he  had  committed  the  management  of  this  world,  and  of  all 
in  it,  to  a  series  of  "gods,"  and  spirits,  good  and  evil,  whom 


Egyptian  Ideas  about  God  and  the  **Gods"   1 15 

it  was  necessary  for  them  to  worship  or  propitiate  as  the  case 
might  be.  It  is  the  existence  of  these  "gods"  and  spirits 
that  has  caused  modern  investigators  to  describe  the 
Egyptian  reHgion  as  polytheistic,  and  even  pantheistic, 
and  to  find  the  greatest  difficulty  in  reconciling  the 
polytheistic  phase  of  it  with  the  monotheistic.  And  it  was 
this  difficulty  which  made  the  eminent  theologian  Tiele 
declare  that  the  religion  of  Egypt  was  from  the  beginning 
polytheistic,  but  that  it  developed  in  two  opposite  directions  ; 
in  the  one  direction  gods  were  multiplied  by  the  addition 
of  local  gods,  and  in  the  other  direction  the  Egyptians  drew 
nearer  and  nearer  to  monotheism.^  The  truth  of  the  matter 
seems  to  me  to  be  that  the  Egyptian  religion  never  wholly 
lost  the  monotheistic  element  which  was  in  it.  It  existed 
in  the  earliest  times,  and  it  frequently  appears  in  the  early 
religious  texts.  It  is  often  observed  in  the  hymns  and 
texts  which  represent  the  teachings  of  bodies  of  priests  who 
emphasize  the  greatness  and  importance  of  the  "  gods  " 
which  they  served,  and  it  was  never  entirely  eliminated. 
In  the  hymns  written  under  the  XVIIIth  dynasty  the 
monotheistic  element  became  exceedingly  prominent,  and, 
even  before  the  relitrious  troubles  which  brought  about  the 
downfall  of  the  dynasty  began,  men  worshipped  the  god 
who  was  One  Only  with  a  sincerity  and  whole-heartedness 
hitherto  unknown.  It  cannot,  of  course,  be  rightly  claimed 
that  the  monotheism  of  this  period  was  identical  with  that 
which  has  been  evolved  by  modern  Christian  nations,  but 
it  was  very  similar,  in  my  opinion,  to  the  monotheism  of  the 

Hebrews,  In  fact,  the  word  Neter,  \3,  is  used  in 
Egyptian  religious  literature  in  much  the  same  way  as  El, 
hVi,  is  used  in  the  Hebrew  Scriptures,  and  also  as  ITI St^  and 
its  plural  Q'^HT'^^  , 

The  difficulty  which  many  students  of  the  Egyptian 
Religion  have  found  in  their  attempts  to  reconcile  the 
monotheistic  and  polytheistic  elements  in  it  is  due  chiefly  to 
the  priests  of  the  various  "  gods  "  of  Egypt,  The  priests  of 
Heliopolis  asserted  that  the  Sun-god  Ra  was  the  greatest 
of  all  the  gods,   and    that   all    the  other    "gods"    of  his 

^  See  Geschiedenis  van  den  Godsdienst  in  de  Oudheid,  Amsterdam,  1893, 
p.  25  ;  and  Lieblein,  Egyptian  Religion,  Leipzig,  1884,  p.  10, 

I    2 


1 1 6  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

company  were  forms  of  him.  These  "  forms  "  of  Ra  were 
Shu,  Tefnut,  Keb,  Nut,  Osiris,  Isis,  Set,  and  Nephthys. 
Now  Shu  and  Tefnut  were  Sudani  deities,  the  original  seat 

of  whose  worship  was  Bukem,  (<^  /^i^  ^.  ,  a  country 

in  the  Eastern  Sudan,  and  they  were  introduced  into 
Egypt  in  very  early  times  with  the  worship  of  the  Stjdant 
Cow-goddess  HathorJ  Keb  is  a  very  old  Earth-god,  on 
whose  back  all  the  trees  and  vegetation  in  the  world  grew, 
yet  the  priests  of  Anu  make  him  a  form  of  Ra.  At  the 
time  when  they  were  stating  in  their  writings  that  Osiris 
was  subordinate  to  Ra,  the  worship  of  Osiris  was 
predominant  throughout  Egypt,  from  Memphis  to  Northern 
Nubia. 

In  like  manner  the  priests  of  Ptah  of  Memphis  claimed 
that  it  was  their  god  Ptah  who  was  the  creator  of  the 
heavens  and  the  earth,  and  that  the  other  great  gods  were 
merely  forms  of  him.  They  were  well  aware  that  Tem, 
Temu,  or  Atem,  had  been  regarded  as  the  creator  of  the 
gods  and  the  world  and  men  from  time  out  of  mind  in 
Egypt.  Yet  they  attributed  to  Ptah  powers  greater  than 
his.  Their  method  of  procedure  was  artificial  and  is  readily 
explained.  They  first  identified  Ptah  with  old  gods  like 
Tatenn  and  Tem,  and  made  him  a  member  of  their 
companies  of  gods  ;  when  this  had  been  done  they  invented 
stories  to  prove  that  his  power  was  greater  than  that  of  his 
colleagues,  and  that  he  was  the  greatest  of  all  the  gods  of 
the  old  companies.  Finally,  they  placed  him  at  the  head  of 
a  company  of  gods  which  consisted  of  forms  of  himself. 
The  best  proof  of  these  statements  is  found  in  Prof  Erman's 
paper  entitled  Ein  Denkmal  7)teviphitischer  Theo/ogie,^ 
which  contains  a  discussion  on  the  contents  of  a  text  found 
on  a  basalt  slab  presented  to  the  British  Museum  by  the 
Earl  Spencer  in  1805.^     This  text  is  much  mutilated,  but 

^  See  Dr.  W.  Junker's  important  paper  Der  A7issuf!;  der  Hathor-Tefnut 
aus  Nubien  (in  Abhand.  der  Konigl.  Preuss.  Akad.,  Berlin,  191 1). 

^  Published  in  the  Siizuti'^sberichie  der  Konigl.  Freuss.  Akad.,  Berlin, 
1911. 

'  See  Guide  to  the  Egyptian  Galleries.,  p.  220  (No.  797).  It  was  first 
published  by  Sharpe,  Egyptia?i  Inscriptions,  I,  Plates  36-38 ;  next  by  Messrs. 
Bryant  and  Read,  in  P.S.B.A.,  1901,  pp.  160  ff. ;  and  a  facsimile  was 
published  by  Mr.  Breasted  in  A.Z.,  Bd.  XXXIX,  pp.  39  ff.,  with  a  sketch  of 
its  contents. 


Egyptian  Ideas  about  God  and  the  "Gods"   1 17 

enough  of  it  remains  to  show  that  it  contains  a  statement  of 
Memphite  theology  as  it  was  understood  by  some  priest, 
who  flourished  probably  under  the  Ancient  Empire.  The 
actual  copy  which  we  possess  was  made  in  the  reign  of 
Shabaka,  from  an  older  copy  on  papyrus,  which  was  worm- 
eaten.  This  document  states  that  Ptah  made  Tem  and  his 
gods,  and  that  he  was  the  arbiter  of  life  and  death.  Every- 
thing on  the  earth  came  into  existence  through  him,  and 
everything  which  is  existed  before  it  came  into  being  in  the 
mind  of  Ptah,  who  was  the  heart  and  tongue  of  the  company 
of  the  gods.  Thus,  at  the  very  same  time,  we  have  within 
twenty  miles  of  each  other  one  body  of  priests  at  Anu 
assertino-  that  their  ood  Ra  was  the  creator  of  the  heavens 
and  the  earth,  and  another  body  of  priests  at  Memphis 
declaring  the  same  thing  of  their  god  Ptah.  And  if  we  had 
all  the  religious  literature  of  Egypt  at  this  period  we  should 
no  doubt  find  that  the  priests  of  Hensu  (Herakleopolis), 
and  of  Khemenu  (Hermopolis),  and  of  Abtu  (Abydos),  and 
of  Uast  (Thebes),  and  of  Behutet  (Edfti),  and  of  Suan 
(Syene),  were  claiming  the  absolute  sovereignty  of  the  gods 
for  Herushefit,  Thoth,  Osiris,  Amen,  Horus,  and  Khernenu 
respectively. 

The  religious  texts  of  all  periods  contain  evidence  that 
the  Egyptians  were  always  occupied  in  trying  to  puzzle  out 
the  riddle  of  creation,  and  we  are  fortunate  in  possessing 
a  papyrus  which  contains  a  more  or  less  connected  theory 
about  the  origin  of  God  and  the  gods,  and  of  the  heavens 
and  the  earth.  This  papyrus  was  written  for  a  priest  called 
Nesi-Menu,  and  is  dated  on  the  first  day  of  the  fourth 
month  of  the  twelfth  year  of  Pharaoh  Alexander,  the  son  of 
Alexander,  i.e.,  311  b.c.^  The  story  of  the  Creation  is 
entitled  "  The  Book  of  knowing  how  Ra  came  into  being," 

9  O  J) ,  and  is  told  by  the 


god    Nebertcher  B^    jj ,   the  Everlasting  God  of  the 

Universe.  Where  and  how  this  god  existed  is  not  said, 
but  it  is  clear  that  he  was  supposed  to  have  created  himself 
and  to  be  self-existent.     The  desire  to  create  the  heavens 

^  The  hieratic  text  is  pubUshed  in  facsimile,  with  a  hieroglyphic  text 
and  English  translation,  in  my  Egyptian  Hieratic  Papyri  in  the  British 
Museum,  London,  19 lo. 


1 1 8  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

and  the  earth  arose  in  his  heart,  or  mind,  and  he  assumed 
the  form  of  the  god  Khepera  W  ^^7^  U  Jj ,  who  from  first 

to  last  was  regarded  as  a  form  of  Nu,  or  the  Creator,  par 
excellence.  At  this  time  nothing  existed  except  the  vast 
mass  of  Celestial  Waters  which  the  Egyptians  called  Nu, 
''      '  ^^^  S\ ,  and  in  this  existed  the  o^erms  of  all  livincr  thintjs 

that  subsequently  took  form  in  heaven  and  on  earth,  but 
they  existed  in  a  state  of  inertness  and  helplessness.  When 
Khepera  rose  out  of  this  watery  mass,  he  found  himself  in 
an  empty  space,  and  he  had  nothing  to  stand  upon. 
Khepera  came  into  being  by  pronouncing  his  own  name, 
and  when  he  wanted  a  place  whereon  to  stand,  he  first 
conceived  the  similitude  of  that  standing  place  in  his  mind, 
and  when  he  had  given  it  a  name,  and  uttered  that  name, 
the  standing  place  at  once  came  into  being.  This  process 
of  thinking  out  the  existence  of  things  is  expressed  in 
Egyptian  by  words  which  mean  literally  "laying  the 
foundation  in  the  heart,"  i.e.,  in  the  mind.  Khepera  also 
possessed  a  Ba  or  Heart-soul,  which  assisted  him  in 
depicting  in  his  mind  the  image  of  the  world  which  was  to 
be.  And  he  was  also  assisted  in  this  work  by  madt,  i.e., 
law,  order,  truth,  etc.,  who  acted  the  part  of  Wisdom  as 
described  in  the  Book  of  Proverbs,  chapter  viii,  verses  22  ff. 
Khepera  next  created  the  first  triad  of  gods.  He  had 
union  with  his  shadow,  and  so  begot  offspring,  who 
proceeded  from  his  body  under  the  forms  of  Shu,  i.e.,  air 
and  dryness,  and  Tefnut,  water  and  moisture.  Shu  and 
Tefnut  were  next  united,  and  their  offspring  were  Keb  the 
Earth-god,  and  Nut,  the  Sky-goddess.  Keb  and  Nut  were 
united,  and  the  offspring  of  their  embraces  were  Osiris, 
Horus,     Set,     Isis     and     Nephthys.       Of     these,     Osiris, 

ni^n'^'Jr,  is   "the   essence  of  the  primeval   matter  "  of 

which  Khepera  himself  was  formed.  Thus  Osiris  was  of 
the  same  substance  as  the  Great  God  who  created  the 
world,  and  was  a  re-incarnation  of  his  great-grandfather, 
a  truly  African  belief  This  portion  of  the  text  helps  to 
explain  the  views  held  about  Osiris  as  the  great  Ancestor- 
god,  who  when  on  earth  was  the  great  benefactor  of  the 
Egyptians,  and  who,  after  his  murder  and  resurrection, 
became  the  saviour  of  their  souls. 


Egyptian  Ideas  about  God  and  the  "Gods"   1 19 

In  continuing  his  narrative  Neb-er-tcher  refers  to  some 
calamity  which  befell  his  Eye,  i.e.,  the  Sun,  and  extinguished 
its  light.  It  is  possible  that  eclipse  or  storm  is  here  referred 
to,  but  from  the  context  it  seems  that  the  god  is  referring 
to  the  comincy  on  of  the  darkness  of  nigrht.  For  he  croes  on 
to  say  that  he  made  a  second  Eye,  i.e.,  the  moon,  to  which 
he  gave  some  of  the  splendour  of  his  first  Eye.  He  then 
assigned  to  it  a  place  in  his  face,  from  which  it  ruled  over 
the  earth,  having  special  power  in  respect  of  the  production 
of  trees,  plants,  vegetables,  herbs,  etc.  The  next  paragraph 
deals  with  the  creation  of  man,  who  sprang,  not  from  the 
earth,  but  directly  from  the  body  of  the  god  Khepera,  or 
Neb-er-tcher.  He  joined  his  members  together,  and  then 
wept  tears  upon  them,  and  men  and  women  came  into  being 
from  the  tears  which  fell  from  his  eyes.  The  creation  of 
quadrupeds  is  not  specially  mentioned,  but  the  god  says 
that  he  created  creeping  things,  and  quadrupeds  are 
probably  meant  to  be  included  among  them.  Men  and 
women  and  all  other  living  creatures  which  were  made  by 
the  god  then  reproduced  their  species,  each  creature  in  its 
own  way,  and  so  the  earth  became  filled  with  their 
descendants. 

Basing  his  statements  contained  in  a  number  of  texts 
composed  or  copied  at  different  periods,  the  late 
Dr.  Brugsch  formulated  the  following  account  of  the  origin 
of  the  gods  :  In  the  beginning  there  existed  neither  heaven 
nor  earth,  and  nothing  existed  except  the  boundless  mass 
of  primeval  water  which  was  shrouded  in  darkness,  and 
which  contained  within  itself  the  germs  and  beginnings, 
male  and  female,  of  everything  which  was  to  be  in  the 
future  world.  The  divine  primeval  spirit,  which  formed  an 
essential  part  of  the  primeval  matter,  felt  within  itself  the 
desire  to  begin  the  work  of  Creation,  and  its  word  woke  to 
life  the  world,  the  form  and  shape  of  which  it  had  already 
depicted  within  itself.  The  first  act  of  creation  began  with 
the  formation  of  an  ^^g'g  out  of  the  primeval  water,  from 
which  emerged  Ra,  the  immediate  cause  of  all  life  upon  the 
earth.  The  almighty  power  of  the  divine  spirit  embodieid 
itself  in  its  most  brilliant  form  in  the  rising  sun.  When  the 
inert  mass  of  primeval  matter  felt  the  desire  of  the  primeval 
spirit  to  begin  the  work  of  creation,  it  began  to  move,  and 
the  creatures  which  were  to  constitute  the  future  world  were 


I20  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

formed  according  to  the  divine  intelligence  Mactt.  Under 
the  influence  of  Thoth,  or  that  form  of  the  divine  intelligence 
which  created  the  world  by  a  word,  eight  elements,  four 
male  and  four  female,  arose  out  of  the  primeval  Nu.  which 
possessed  the  properties  of  the  male  and  female.  These 
eight  elements  were  called  Nu  and  Nut,  Heh  and  Hehet, 
Kek  and  Keket,  and  Nen  and  Nenet  ;  collectively  they 
were  called  "  Khemenu,"  or  the  "  Eight,"  and  they  were 
considered  as  primeval  fathers  and  mothers.  They  appear 
in  two  forms  :  i .  As  apes,  four  male  and  four  female,  who 
stand  in  adoration  of  the  sun  when  he  rises,  and  greet  him 
with  songs  and  hymns  of  praise.  2,  As  human  beings, 
four  having  the  heads  of  frogs,  and  four  the  heads  of 
serpents.  The  birth  of  light  from  the  waters,  and  of  fire 
from  the  moist  mass  of  primeval  matter,  and  of  Ra  from 
Nu,  formed  the  starting  point  of  all  mythological  speculations, 
conjectures,  and  theories  of  the  Egyptian  priests.  The 
lieht  of  the  sun  rave  birth  to  itself  out  of  chaos,  and  the 
conception  of  the  future  world  was  depicted  in  Thoth  the 
divine  intelligence  ;  when  Thoth  gave  the  word,  what  he 
commanded  at  once  took  place  by  means  of  Ptah  and 
Khnemu,  the  visible  representatives  who  turned  Thoth's 
command  into  deed.  Khnemu  made  the  ^<g'g  of  the  sun, 
and  Ptah  gave  to  the  god  of  light  a  finished  body.  The 
first  company  of  the  gods  consisted  of  Shu,  Tefnut,  K^h, 
Nut,  Osiris,  Isis,  Set,  Nephthys,  Horus,  and  their  governor 
Tem,  or  Atmu. 

The  reader  has  now  before  him  the  main  points  of  the 
evidence  concerning  the  Egyptians'  notions  about  God, 
and  the  cosmic  powers  and  their  phases,  and  the 
anthropomorphic  creations  with  which  they  peopled  the 
Other  World,  all  of  which  have  been  derived  from  the 
native  literature  of  ancient  Egypt.  The  different 
interpretations  which  different  Egyptologists  have  placed 
upon  the  facts  demonstrate  the  difficulty  of  the  subject. 
Speaking  generally,  the  interpreters  may  be  divided  into 
two  classes  :  (i)  Those  who  regard  the  Egyptian  religion 
as  the  product  of  half-savage  men,  and  think  that  it  is 
nothing  but  a  mixture  of  crude,  and  often  disgusting, 
nature  cults  and  superstitions  of  the  most  stupid  and 
childish  character.  (2)  Those  who  admit  the  savage 
origins  of  many  of  the  beliefs  which  the  natural  conservatism 


Egyptian  Ideas  about  God  and  the  "Gods"   121 

of  the  Egyptians  preserved  carefully,  but  who  think  they 
are  able  to  trace  a  steady  development  in  the  religion  until 
it  reached  a  point  at  which  it  possessed  true  ideas  about  God 
and  many  of  the  spiritual  conceptions  which  are  on  a  par 
with  those  of  the  Hebrews  and  Arabs,  and  many  Oriental 
Christian  peoples.  The  mind  of  the  Egyptian  was 
incapable  of  abstract  thought  in  the  modern  sense  of  the 
word,  and  in  every  subject  he  sought  for  concrete  facts, 
which  could  be  expressed  in  definite  statements.  From 
first  to  last  the  texts  proclaim  the  unalterable  belief  of  the 
Egyptian  in  the  resurrection  and  in  the  immortality  of  the 
soul  that  was  to  be  enjoyed  in  a  transformed  Spirit-body, 
in  the  Kingdom  of  Osiris,  the  god  who  had  come  upon  the 
earth  "  to  set  right  in  the  place  of  wrong."  None  but  the 
souls  of  the  just  could  enter  that  kingdom,  and  no  liar  and 
worker  of  deceit  could  hope  to  pass  the  searching  trial  in 
the  Judgment  Hall  and  be  declared  innocent  on  the  day 
of  the  "  weighing  of  words."  Being  finite,  the  Egyptian 
failed  to  comprehend  the  infinite  and  eternal  God,  but  the 
God-man  Osiris  was  ever  present  in  his  mind,  as  the 
tombs  of  all  periods  testify,  and  the  Egyptian  who  sang 
the  hymns  and  prayed  the  prayers  given  in  the  Book  of 
the  Dead  was  unlikely  to  allow  his  spiritual  needs  to  be 
satisfied  by  a  belief  in  "gods  "  who  ate  and  drank,  loved 
and  hated,  waged  war,  and  grew  old  and  died.  And  here 
we  may  give  a  rendering  of  the  ancient  Legend  of  Ra  and 
Isis,  which  will  illustrate  the  stories  which  the  Egyptians 
told  of  their  gods.  The  papyrus  containing  the  story  is 
preserved  in  Turin,  ^  and  versions  of  the  story  have  been 
published  in  English,  French,  and  German.^  The 
Legend  runs  : — 

The  Chapter  of  the  Divine  God,  who  created 
himself,  who  made  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  and 
the  breath  of  life,  and  fire,  and  the  gods,  and 
men,  and  beasts,  and  cattle,  and  reptiles,  and 
feathered  fowl,  and  the  fish  ;  who  is  the  king  of 
men  and  gods,  the  one  form,  to  whom  periods  of  one 

^  See  Pleyte  and  Rossi,  Papyrus  de  Turin,  Plates  31,  77,  131,  138. 

-  See  Lefebure,  A.Z.,  1883,  pp.  27  ff. ;  Wiedemann,  Die  Religion,  p.  29  ; 
Budge,  First  Steps  in  Egyptian,  pp.  241  ff.  ;  and  for  summaries  of  it  see 
Erman,  Aegypten,  p.  359,  and  Maspero,  Les  Origines,  pp.  162-164. 


122  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

HUNDRED  AND  TWENTY  YEARS  ARE  AS  SINGLE  YEARS,  WHOSE 
MULTITUDINOUS  NAMES  ARE  UNKNOWABLE,  FOR  [eVEN]  THE 
GODS    KNOW    THEM    NOT. 

"  Behold,  the  croddess  I  sis  lived  in  the  form  of  a 
"  woman,  who  had  the  knowledge  of  words  of  power.  Her 
"  heart  turned  away  in  disgust  from  the  millions  of  men, 
"  and  she  chose  for  herself  the  millions  of  the  gods,  but  she 
"  esteemed  more  highly  the  millions  of  the  spirits.  Was  it 
"  not  possible  to  become  even  as  was  Ra  in  heaven  and 
*'  upon  earth,  and  to  make  herself  mistress  of  the  earth 
"  and  a  mighty  goddess  by  means  of  the  knowledge  of  the 
"  Name  of  the  holy  god  ?  Thus  did  she  meditate  in  her 
"  heart. 

"  Behold,  Ra  entered  [heaven]  each  day  at  the  head  of 
"  his  mariners,  stablishing  himself  upon  the  double  throne 
"  of  the  two  horizons.  Now  the  divine  one  had 
"  become  old,  he  dribbled  at  the  mouth,  and  he  let  his 
"  emissions  go  forth  from  him  upon  the  earth,  and  his 
"  spittle  fell  upon  the  ground.  This  Isis  kneaded  with 
"  dust  in  her  hand,  and  she  fashioned  it  in  the  form  of  a 
"  sacred  serpent  with  dart-like  fangs,  so  that  none  might 
"  be  able  to  escape  alive  from  it,  and  she  placed  it  on  the 
"  path  whereon  the  great  god  was  about  to  travel, 
"  according  to  his  desire,  round  about  the  Two  Lands  {i.e., 
"  Egypt).  Then  the  holy  god  rose  up  in  the  tabernacle  of 
"  the  gods  in  the  Great  House  {i.e.,  the  sky),  Life,  Strength, 
"  Health  [be  to  him]!  among  those  who  were  in  his  train, 
"  and  [as]  he  journeyed  on  his  way  according  to  his  custom 
"  daily,  the  holy  serpent  drove  his  fangs  into  him.  The 
"  living  fire  [began]  to  depart  from  the  god's  body,  and  the 
"  reptile  destroyed  the  dweller  among  the  cedars.  Then 
"  the  mighty  god  opened  his  mouth,  and  the  cry  of  His 
"Majesty,  Life,  Strength,  Health  [be  to  him]!  rang 
"  through  the  heavens.  The  Company  of  the  gods  said, 
•'  '  What  is  it  ? '  and  the  gods  of  Ra  said,  '  What  is  the 
"  matter } '  Now  the  god  found  [no  words]  wherewith  to 
"  answer  concerning  himself,  for  his  jaws  shut,  his  lips 
•*  trembled,  and  the  poison  conquered  all  his  members,  just 
"  as  Hapi  {i.e.,  the  Nile)  conquereth  all  the  land  through 
"  which  he  Howeth. 

"  Then  the  great  god  made  firm  his  heart,  and  he  cried 
"  out  to  the  gods  who  were  in  his  following  saying  :   '  Come 


Egyptian  Ideas  about  God  and  the  "Gods"   123 

ye  unto  me,  O  ye  who  have  sprung  from  my  members,  ye 
gods  who  have  proceeded  from  me,  for  I  wish  to  tell  you 
what  hath  happened.  I  have  been  stung  by  some  deadly 
thing,  of  which  my  heart  hath  no  knowledge,  and  which 
I  have  neither  seen  with  my  eyes  nor  made  with  my 
hand.  I  have  no  knowledge  whatsoever  of  that  which 
hath  done  this  thing  to  me.  Never  before  have  I  felt 
pain  like  unto  this,  and  no  pain  can  be  worse  than  this. 
I  am  a  Prince,  and  the  Son  of  a  Prince,  I  am  a  divine 
emanation,  I  was  produced  by  a  god.  I  am  a  Great  One, 
and  the  son  of  a  Great  One,  and  my  father  determined 
for  me  my  name.  My  names  are  multitudinous,  my 
forms  are  manifold,  and  my  being  existeth  in  every  god. 
I  am  invoked  as  Thoth  and  Heru-Hekenu.  My  father 
and  my  mother  uttered  my  name,  and  they  hid  it  in  my 
body  when  I  was  born,  so  that  none  of  those  who  would 
use  against  me  words  of  power  might  succeed  in  making 
their  enchantments  to  have  dominion  over  me.  I  was 
coming  forth  from  my  tabernacle  to  look  upon  that 
which  I  had  made,  and  was  making  my  way  through  the 
Two  Lands  (i.e.,  Egypt),  which  I  made,  when  I  was 
stung,  but  by  what  I  know  not.  Can  it  be  fire  ?  Can 
it  be  water  ?  My  heart  is  full  of  burning  fire,  my  limbs 
are  shivering,  and  in  my  members  are  shooting  pains. 
Let  there  come  to  me  my  children  the  gods,  who  possess 
words  of  power,  whose  mouths  are  skilled  in  uttering 
them,  and  whose  powers  reach  to  the  very  heavens.' 

"  Then  his  children  came  unto  him,  and  every  god  was 
there  uttering  cries  of  lamentation.  And  Isis  came  with 
her  words  of  power,  and  in  her  mouth  was  the  breath  of 
life.  Now  the  words  which  she  stringeth  together 
destroy  diseases,  and  they  make  to  live  those  whose 
throats  are  stopped  up  [i.e.,  the  dead)  and  she  said, 
'  What  is  this,  O  divine  father  ?  What  is  the  matter  ? 
Hath  a  serpent  shot  his  venom  into  thee }  Hath 
anything  which  thou  hast  fashioned  [dared]  to  lift  up  his 
head  against  thee  ?  Verily,  it  shall  be  overcome  by 
effective  words  of  power,  and  I  will  drive  it  away  before 
thy  light.'  The  holy  god  opened  his  mouth  and  said, 
'  I  was  coming  along  the  road,  and  was  passing  through 
my  country  of  Egypt,  for  I  wished  to  look  upon  what  I 
had  made,  when  lo  !    I  was  bitten  by  a  serpent.     Can  it 


1 24  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

"  be  fire  ?  Can  it  be  water  ?  I  am  colder  than  water. 
"  I  am  hotter  than  fire.  All  my  members  sweat,  my  body 
"  quaketh,  mine  eye  faileth  me,  I  cannot  look  at  the 
"  heavens.  Water  exudeth  from  my  face,  as  in  the  time 
"  of  the   Inundation.' 

"  Then  Isis  said  unto  Ra,  '  O  my  divine  father,  tell  me 
"  thy  name,  for  he  who  is  able  to  pronounce  his  name  shall 
"  live.'  [And  Ra  said],  '  I  am  the  maker  of  the  heavens 
"  and  the  earth.  I  have  knit  together  the  mountains,  and 
*'  I  have  created  everything  which  existeth  upon  them. 
"  I  am  the  maker  of  the  waters.  I  have  made  Mehturt  to 
"  come  into  being.  I  made  Ka-en-mut-f,  and  I  have 
"  created  the  joys  of  love.  I  am  the  maker  of  heaven. 
"  I  have  made  to  be  hidden  the  two  gods  of  the  horizon. 
"  I  have  placed  the  soul  of  the  gods  in  them.  I  am  the 
*'  Being  who  openeth  his  eyes  and  the  light  cometh  ;  I  am 
*'  the  Being  who  shutteth  his  eyes  and  darkness  cometh. 
"  I  am  he  who  commandeth,  and  the  waters  of  the  Nile 
"  flow  forth.  I  am  he  whose  name  the  gods  know  not. 
"  I  am  the  maker  of  the  hours  and  the  creator  of  the  days. 
"  I  inaugurate  festivals.  I  make  the  waterflood.  I  am 
"  the  creator  of  the  fire  of  life  through  which  the  products 
"  of  the  workshops  come  into  being.  I  am  Khepera  in 
"  the  morning,  Ra  at  mid-day,  and  Temu  in  the  evening.' 
"  Nevertheless  the  poison  was  not  turned  aside  from  its 
"  course,  and  the  pain  of  the  great  god  was  not  relieved. 

'•  Then  Isis  said  unto  Ra :  '  Among  the  words  which  thou 
"  hast  said  unto  me  there  is  no  mention  of  thy  name.  Declare 
*'  thou  to  me  thy  name,  and  the  poison  shall  leave  thee,  for 
"  he  who  declareth  his  name  shall  live.'  Meanwhile  the 
"  poison  burned  like  blazing  fire,  and  the  heat  thereof  was 
"  stronger  than  that  of  a  fire  that  burneth  brighdy.  Then 
**  the  Majesty  of  Ra  said  :  '  I  will  permit  Isis  to  search  me, 
"  and  my  name  shall  come  forth  from  my  body  and  go 
**  into  hers.'  Then  the  divine  one  hid  himself  from  the 
"  gods,  and  the  throne  in  the  Boat  of  Millions  of  Years  was 
"  empty.  And  when  the  time  came  for  the  heart  [of  the 
"  god]  to  come  forth,  Isis  said  unto  her  son  Horus  :  '  The 
"  great  god  bindeth  himself  by  an  oath  to  give  his  two 
"  Eyes '  (i.e.,  the  sun  and  moon).  Thus  was  the  great 
"  god  made  to  yield  up  his  name.  Then  Isis,  the  great  lady 
**  of  words  of  power,  said  :  '  Flow  poison,  come  out  of  Ra. 


Egyptian  Ideas  about  God  and  the  "Gods"   125 

"  Let  the  Eye  of  Horus  come  forth  from  the  god  and 
"  shine  (?)  outside  his  mouth.  I  work,  I  make  the  poison 
"  to  fall  on  the  ground,  for  the  venom  is  conquered.  Verily 
"  the  name  of  the  great  god  hath  been  taken  away  from 
"  him.  Ra  shall  live,  and  the  poison  shall  die ;  if  the 
"  poison  liveth  then  Ra  shall  die.  Similarly  so-and-so 
"  [if  he  hath  been  poisoned  and  these  words  be  said  over 
"  him]  shall  live,  and  the  poison  shall  die.'  These  were 
"  the  words  which  Isis  spake,  the  great  lady,  the  Queen  of 
"  the  gods,  and  she  had  knowledge  of  Ra's  own  name." 

Rubric  :  The  above  words  shall  be  said  over  an  imao^e 
of  Temu,  and  an  image  of  Heru-Hekenu,  and  an  image 
of  Isis,  and  an  image  of  Horus. 


APPENDIX 

LIST   OF   THE    GODS    WHOSE   NAMES    WERE 

RECITED   BY   THE   DECEASED   TO   PERFECT    HIS 

SPIRIT-SOUL 

The  following  names  form  an  important  section  of  the 
Theban  Recension  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead,  and  the  recital 
of  them,  either  by  the  father  or  son  of  the  deceased,  was 
obligatory  during  every  festival  of  Ament.  The  recital  of 
them  made  the  deceased  a  companion  of  the  gods,  and 
made  him  dear  to  the  heart  of  Ra,  and  conferred  upon  him 
the  power  to  leave  the  Tuat  and  to  re-enter  it  at  will.  The 
list  presumably  gives  the  names  of  all  the  gods  who  were 
officially  recognised  by  the  priests  of  Osiris.  The  last 
section  of  it,  which  o-ives  the  names  of  all  the  grreat  towns  in 
which  the  Cult  of  Osiris  flourished,  is  interesting  as  proving 
that  under  the  XVIIIth  dynasty  the  recognition  of  Osiris 
as  the  great  Ancestor-god  of  the  whole  of  Egypt  was 
complete.  The  list  is  taken  from  the  Papyrus  of  Nu  (Brit. 
Mus.  No.  10477,  Sheet  15)  : — 


.   Osiris  Khenti  Amenti         X  ffTD  "^    \  t  ^  \  ^ 


2.   Ra-Heru-Khuti  ^^  c^  "^^^ 

■2  ,         In  U  AAAAAA 

*^  L  J     AAAAA/\ 


^1^^ 


126  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

4.  Maat 

5.  Boat  of  Ra 

6.  Tern 

7.  Great    Company  of  the     Q^^  ^  ^^  j 

Gods.  o   I  11    ^    1 

8.  Little   Company  of  the     Q  "=1^^^^  ^1 


1 1 


Gods 


9.   Horus,  lord  of  the   Urrt 
Crown 

10.  Shu 

11.  Tefnut 

12.  Keb 

13.  Nut 

14.  I  sis 

15.  Nephthys 

16.  Hetkau-Nebtertcher      ^ 

17.  Shenat-pet-uthest-neter 

18.  Aukert-khentt-asts 

19.  Khebit-saht-neter 


4^ 


^\i 


^    0 


J^ 


o 


o  ^ 


j1 

n  ^  U  I 
m  n  I  I  I 


^ 


1  Perhaps  we  are  to  read  pestchet  neteru,   "  the  nine  gods,"  and 
paut  neterti. 

2  The  Seven  Cows  of  Chapter  CXLVIII. 


1i 


not 


Egyptian  Ideas  about  God  and  the  "Gods"   127 


5 


20.    Urmertus-teshcr-sheni 


21.   Khnemtemankh-anuit 


22.   Sekhmet-rens-em-abuts 


23.  The  Bull  of  the  Seven     r=Qi 

Cows 

24.  Sekhem  Nefer 

25.  Nekhen-semu-taui 

26.  Khu-herab-het-ashemu 

27.  Khenti-herab-het- 

tesheru 

28.  Kesta  (or  Mesta) 

29.  Hepi 

30.  Tuamutef 

31.  Qebhsenuf 

32.  The  Southern  Atert 

7^7,.  The  Northern  Atert 
34.  The  Sektet  Boat 


u     1^ 


AAAAAA 

0 


„  AAAAAA 


^ 


IMS 


H  H 


miTllczs: 


'^n 


/tg, 


n 


A.AAAAA 


■=^4^  a     Egypt). 

-=>S  D  (Lower 
^    ^    a      Egypt). 


^  The  Four  Rudders  of  heaven  of  Chapter  CXLVIII. 
2  The  Four  Sons  of  Horus. 


128 


The  Papyrus  of  Ani 


35.  The  Atet  Boat 


xix    ^ 


36.  Thoth 


■^'].  Gods  of  the  South 

38.  Gods  of  the  North 

39.  Gods  of  the  West 

40.  Gods  of  the  East 

41.  Gods     of     the      Thigh 

(Great  Bear) 


^1 

1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 


J' 


I 


Ti  111 


42.  Gods  of  offerings 

43.  The  Great  House 

44.  The  House  of  Fire 

45.  The  Gods  of  the  Aats 

46.  The  Gods  of  the  Horizon     1  '  [^ 

I  111  ^i 

47.  The  Gods  of  the  Fields  |      Ojjjl 

48.  The  Gods  of  Grain  (?)  ^  j,  ^  l^g 

49.  The  Gods  of  Fire  Ln^^iJl 

50.  The  Roads  of  the  South  f]  ^"  f^  ^  ^ 

51.  The  Roads  of  the  North  f]  "^  f^  ^  ^ 

52.  The  Roads  of  the  East  f]  §;  fff  f  J  ^  ^ 

53.  The  Roads  of  the  West  f]  ^  ff^  t  V I 

54.  The  Gates  of  the  Tuat 


gods 


i^Ji  I  I  I 


ITDSU  I 


Egyptian  Ideas  about  God  and  the  "Gods"   129 
55.TheJ^ylonsoftheTuat-     pj«^-.^-|| 


56.  The  Hidden  Doors  ;^li™\^flis^i 

57.  The  Hidden  Gates  ^^^^^^^^^Si 

58.  The^  Jeepers    °f     *«  ^  _^  ^  | ,  ^  ^  , 

59.  The  Gates  of  the  Tuat-        crzj  )k S)  1 

gods  111^  ^1 

60.  The  Hidden  Faces  "^  '^%  "^  ' 

^  n  -M>  Ji  I  I 


61.  Guards  of  the  Roads  ""^"^H^^'       in  fl  ' 

62.  The  Keepers I^^l^i  V  ^tJll^ 

63.  The     Keepers    of     the  n         ^  1  h-i-h  f^^^^^ 

Cemeteries  (?)  I'^^^^Jit     ^    111 


64.  The  Fire-gods 

65.  The  Altar-gods  kV^iq^TiJI 

66.  The  Opener-gods,    who     ^  fl  1]  ™  1  ^  k  ^  ^  ^ 

extinoruish      nre      and 

name  m  Ament  "^^^      /[      Wl  ^  ff     wi  ! 


VOL.  I.  K 


130  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 


THE   ABODE   OF   THE    BLESSED 

In  primitive  times  the  Egyptians  believed  that  after 
death  the  souls  of  those  who  had  spoken  the  truth  upon 
earth,  and  who  had  committed  no  act  of  fraud,  deceit,  or 
double-dealing,  made  their  way  by  some  means  or  other  to 
a  heaven,  and  took  up  their  abode  with  the  gods.  Where 
this  heaven  was  situated  they  had  no  idea,  and  of  what  it 
was  like  they  had  no  conception,  but  they  formulated  vague 
views  about  the  unseen  and  unknown  home  of  their  beloved, 
and  some  of  these  have  been  preserved  in  the  religious 
texts  of  the  later  Egyptians  which  have  come  down  to  us. 
About  one  thing  they  had  no  doubt  at  all,  namely,  that  the 
spirits  of  the  dead  left  this  earth.  Primitive  man  assumed 
naturally  that  they  went  up  into  the  sky,  and  from  thence 
to  some  place  beyond  it.  What  the  sky  was  exactly  he 
did  not  know,  but  in  the  earliest  times  he  seems  to  have 
thought  that  it  was  formed  of  a  very  large  flat  slab  of 
a  kind  of  stone  or  metal  called  baa,  which  formed  a  ceiling 
for  the  earth,  and  more  or  less  corresponded  with  it  in 
general  shape.  Now  such  a  slab  must  have  something  to 
rest  on,  so  it  was  believed  that  it  rested  on  two  mountains, 
one  in  the  east  and  the  other  in  the  west.  The  eastern 
mountain  was  called  Bakha,  and  the  western  mountain 
Manu.  How  this  slab  was  represented  pictorially  in  early 
times  cannot  be  said,  but  in  the  oldest  hieroglyphic  texts 
known,  the  sky  is  indicated  by  the  hieroglyph  f=^,  which 
seems  to  be  intended  for  a  picture  of  the  slab,  very  slightly 
vaulted,  with  a  projection  at  each  end  of  it  by  which  it 
rested  on  the  mountains  of  Bakha  and  Manu.  Another 
early  view  was  that  the  slab  of  the  sky  rested  on  four 
pillars,  which  in   later   texts   are  represented  by  I|||.  and 

when  the  inventors  of  the  hieroglyphic  system  of  writing 
wanted  a  determinative  to  indicate  a  rainstorm  or  a  hail- 
storm, with  thunder  and  lightning,  they  used  the  sign  ^jjff', 
i.e.,  the  sky  falling  down,  and  the  four  pillars  projecting 
through  it.  The  four  pillars  of  the  sky  in  still  later  times 
represented  the  Four  Cardinal  Points,  and  the  pillars  were 
thought  to  be  kept  in  position  by  "  the  four  gods  who  stood 


The  Abode  of  the  Blessed  131 

by  them."^  These  four  gods  were  the  "  Children  of  Horus  " 
fl  V^'  ^^^  ^^^^  called  Amsetl^  ^v  fi^,  Hap  |^'^.'^=> 
Tuamutef  :)i(:  \\         ,    and    Qebhsenuf  PO|,Vi!^.=_.      Each 


god  ruled  over  one  quarter  of  the  world.  The  reader  of 
the  Book  of  the  Dead  will  find  that  in  religious  literature 
generally  they  appear  chiefly  as  the  guardians  of  the 
intestines  of  the  dead,  which  were  mummified  separately 
and  placed  in  jars  commonly  called  "  Canopic."  Before  we 
pass  on  to  other  early  theories  about  the  sky  we  may  note 
that  the  sun  was  supposed  to  emerge  from  a  hole  in  one 
end  of  the  slab  of  the  sky,  and  to  pass  under  it,  lighting 
this  world  as  it  passed,  and  to  disappear  in  a  hole  at  the 
other  end  of  the  slab.  The  stars  were  thought  to  be  lamps 
which  hung  from  the  slab,  as  the  hieroglyph  shows  ""^^ . 
When  the  moon  waned  it  was  thought  that  a  bit  of  it  was 
eaten  away  by  the  fiend  of  darkness,  and  when  it  dis- 
appeared altogether,  it  was  believed  that  it  had  been 
swallowed  by  him. 

Another  very  early  view  was  that  the  sky  was  the  body 
of  a  gigantic  woman,  and  that  it  was  supported  by  her  two 
legs  and  her  two  arms  ^^,  which  were  the  four  pillars  of 
heaven.  The  body  of  this  Sky-woman  was  sometimes 
studded  with  stars  i<i(i<i<:i<.  The  sun  was  born  each 
morning,  and  passed  along  her  body  towards  her  mouth, 
into  which  it  disappeared  in  the  evening  to  be  re-born  the 
following  morning.  The  night-sky  was  supposed  to  be 
another  woman,  and  the  moon  was  born,  and  having  passed 
along  her  body  disappeared  into  her  mouth.  The  Sky- 
women  are  well  illustrated  in  the  annexed  illustration  (p.  132), 
which  is  reproduced  from  Lanzone,  Mitologia,\.-aN.  155.  Here 
we  have  :  i.  A  woman  whose  body  is  decorated  with  two 
winged  disks,  which  probably  represent  the  morning  and 
evening  sun  ;  she  has  a  Sudani  crown  of  plumes  on  her 
head,  and  wears  armlets  and  bracelets.  2.  A  smaller 
woman,  whose  body  is  decorated  with  small  disks  ;  on  her 
hands  stands  a  god  whose  head  touches  the  hands  of  the 
larger  woman.      Between  the  front  of  the  one  woman  and 

Recueil  de  Travaux,  V,  p,  27  (1.  233). 

K    2 


132  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

the  back  of  the  other  are  a  large  winged  disk,  and  some 
indeterminate  object,  winged.  Round  about  them  are 
stars.  By  the  shoulders  of  the  smaller  woman  is  the 
goddess  Nephthys.  holding  in  her  hands  one  of  the  two 
boats  in  which  the  sun  sailed  across  the  sky,  and  by  the 


thicrhs  stands  the  goddess  I  sis  holding  the  other  boat. 
3.  A  god  lying  on  the  ground  with  his  arms  stretched  out 
along  it,  and  holding  a  disk  in  each  hand.  His  body  is 
bent  round  to  form  a  kind  of  circle,  and  his  feet  rest  on  the 
ground.  The  space  enclosed  is  thought  to  represent  the 
region  where  the  dead  live. 

In  an  interesting  scene  on  a  coffin  in  the  British  Museum 
(No.  6670,  First  Egyptian  Room)  we  find  the  night-sky 
depicted  in  the  form  of  a  woman  with  her  arms  stretched 
out  at  full  length  above  her  head.  On  her  body  rest  two 
yellow  disks,  which  symbolize  the  moon,  and  a  red  disk, 
which  is  intended  for  the  sun.  The  view  that  the  sky  was 
a  woman  was  very  popular  among  the  Egyptians  down  to 
a  comparatively  late  period,  and  the  religious  texts  are  full 
of  allusions  to  the  birth  of  the  deceased  on  the  thighs  of 
a  Sky-woman. 

Another  view  represented  the  sky  in  the  form  of  a  gigantic 
cow,  her  body  forming  the  sky,  and  her  four  legs  the  pillars 
of  the  same.  Her  legs  were  held  in  position  by  eight  gods, 
two  to  each  leg,  and  her  body  was  kept  in  its  place  by  a 


The  Abode  of  the  Blessed  133 

god  who  held  it  up  with  his  upraised  arms,  T.     This  cow 

gave  birth  to  the  sun,  which  was  then  likened  to  a  calf,  and 
the  deceased  when  re-born  in  the  sky  was  compared  to  a 
sucking  calf  According  to  another  very  old  belief  the  sky 
was  the  face  of  a  man,  and  the  sun  and  the  moon  were  his 
two  eyes  ;  the  sun  was  his  right  eye  ^^ ,  and  the  moon  his 
left  ^^ .  When  a  storm  came,  and  thunder-clouds  con- 
cealed the  sun,  it  was  thought  that  the  king  of  darkness  had 
done  some  injury  to  the  right  eye,  and  caused  it  to  shed 
tears  {i.e.,  rain).  During  an  eclipse  the  right  eye  was 
supposed  to  be  temporarily  disabled.  The  moon  was 
supposed  to  suffer  in  a  similar  manner.  Yet  another 
view  held  in  primitive  times  was  that  the  sky  was  a  vast 
meadow  over  which  a  huge  beetle  crawled,  pushing  the 
disk  of  the  sun  before  him.  This  beetle  was  the  Sky-god, 
and,  arguing  from  theexample  of  the  h&ei\&  [Scar abacus  sacer) 
which  was  observed  to  roll  along  with  its  hind  legs  a  ball 
that  was  believed  to  contain  its  eggs,  the  Early  Egyptians 
thought  that  the  ball  of  the  Sky-god  contained  his  &gg,  and 
that  the  sun  was  his  offspring.  Thanks,  however,  to  the 
investigations  of  the  eminent  entomologist,  Monsieur  J.  H. 
Fabre,  we  now  know  that  the  ball  which  the  Scarabaeus  sacer 
rolls  along  contains  not  its  eggs,  but  dung  that  is  to  serve  as 
food  for  its  ^'g'g,  which  it  lays  in  a  carefully  prepared  place. 
Later  still,  the  Egyptians  came  to  the  conclusion  that 
the  sky  was  nothing  but  a  vast  layer  of  water,  and  then 
their  difficulties  in  explaining  how  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars 
travelled  across  it  disappeared,  for  they  were  quite  certain 
in  their  minds  that  the  celestial  bodies  traversed  the  sky  in 
boats.  The  sun  possessed  two  boats  called  "  Mantchet  " 
and  "  Semktet,"  and  the  moon,  planets  and  principal  stars 
each  possessed  a  boat.  What  these  boats  were  made  of  they 
never  stopped  to  inquire,  and  they  seem  to  have  been  content 
to  think  that  the  Boats  of  Ra  were  made  of  some  substance 
which  could  not  be  consumed.  From  the  annexed  interest- 
ing illustration  (p.  134),  which  is  reproduced  from  the  marble 
sarcophagus  of  Seti  I,  we  see  that  about  1350  B.C.  the 
Egyptians  still  believed  that  the  sun  rose  out  of  the  Celestial 
Waters  each  morning  in  a  boat.     This  boat  is  being  lifted 

out  of  the  water  by  the  god  Nu,   ,  and  is  supported  by 

the  hands  of  his  upstretched  arms,  which,  as  the  text  says. 


134 


The  Papyrus  of  Ani 


"  Come  forth  from  the  waters,  and  bear  up  this  god."  In 
the  boat  we  see  the  monster  beetle  already  mentioned 
pushing  the  solar  disk  upwards  and  into  the  hands  of  the 
goddess   Nut,    i.e.,   the   Sky-goddess   "  who   receives   Ra," 


D   ^ 


°  y  2ffi  M  '^ '     On  the  right  of  the  beetle  are  the  goddess 


Nephthys,  TT ,  and  three  gods,  and  on  the  left  are  Isis,  r^o, 
Ast,  or  Set,  Keb,  the  Earth-god,  ^^,  A,  i.e.,  Thoth,  (1, 
Heka,  the  god  who  utters  words  of  power,   Hu,   \\>,  and 

Sa,  ^^^  .  The  legend  above  reads  :  "  This  god  rests  in  the 
Ant  (  =  Mantchet)  Boat  with  the  gods  who  are  with  him." 


The  Abode  of  the  Blessed  135 

In  the  upper  part  of  the  illustration,  i.e.,  in  a  remote  place 
among  the  Celestial  Waters,  we  see  the  body  of  a  man  bent 
round  backwards  in  such  a  way  as  to  form  a  circle,  and  the 
toes  touching  the  back  of  the  head.  This  god  is,  the  text 
tells  us,  Osiris,  and  it  is  his  body  which  forms  the  circle  of 
the  Tuat.  But  what  is  the  Tuat,  and  what  is  the  meaning 
of  the  name  ?  Tuat  is  the  name  which  the  Egyptians  gave 
in  primitive  times  to  the  region  to  which  the  dead  departed 
after  they  had  left  this  earth,  and  the  word  has  been 
translated  by  "Other  World,"  "Hades,"  "Underworld," 
"  Hell,"  the  "  place  of  departed  spirits,"  and  the  like.  The 
exact  meaning  of  the  word  is  unknown,  and  it  seems  to 
have  been  lost  in  very  early  times.  No  English  word  or 
words  will  convey  the  idea  which  those  who  first  used  the 
word  "  Tuat"  applied  to  it,  and  it  must  not  be  translated  by 
"  Underworld,"  or  "  Hell,"  or  "  Sheol,"  or  "Jehannum,"  for 
each  of  these  words  has  a  special  and  limited  meaning. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  Tuat  possessed  all  the  character- 
istics which  we  associate  with  these  words,  for  it  was 
"  unseen,"  and  dark  and  gloomy,  and  there  were  pits  of  fire 
in  it,  and  it  formed  the  home  of  hellish  monsters,  and  of  the 
damned.  Speaking  generally,  we  may  say  that  "  Other 
World  "   is  a   fairly  accurate   rendering  of  "  Tuat."     The 

oldest  form  of  the  name  is  Tat,  c:^:^  "^  "^ ,  which  is  found  in 

the   Pyramid  Texts.     The  chief  god  of  the  Tuat,  or  the 

personification  of  the  place,  was  "Tuaut,"  ^^^  j^wj'  ^^d 

the  gods  of  it  were  the  "  Tuatiu,"  ^^.^^^  |  •     Later 

forms  of  the  name  are  ® ,  ®  k\  >    >  ^  ^^  j-_~,  > 


1        '7k      tV      ^ 

and  ^  ^  \\ 

The  early  Egyptians  thought  that  Egypt  was  the  world, 
and  that  it  was  surrounded  by  a  chain  of  lofty  mountains, 
like  the  Gebel  Kaf  of  the  Arabs,  which  was  pierced  in  two 
places,  one  in  the  east  and  the  other  in  the  west.  In  the 
evening  the  sun  passed  through  the  western  hole,  and 
travelling,  not  under  the  earth,  but  on  the  same  plane  and 
outside  the  chain  of  mountains,  it  came  round  to  the  eastern 
hole  in  the  mountains,  through  which  it  entered  to  begin 
the  new  day  above  the  earth.   Outside  the  chain  of  mountains, 


136  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

but  quite  close  to  them,  was  situated  the  Tuat,  and  it  ran 
parallel  with  them.  On  the  outer  side  of  th^  Tuat  was 
another  chain  of  mountains,  and  a  river  ran  between  them. 
We  may  say,  then,  that  the  T^at  closely  resembled  that  part 
of  the  Valley  of  the  Nile  which  constitutes  Egypt,  and  that 
it  was  to  all  intents  and  purposes  circular  in  form.  Now  as 
the  T'Jat  lay  on  the  other  side  of  the  chain  of  mountains 
which  surrounded  Egypt,  and  was  therefore  deprived  of  the 
light  of  the  sun  and  moon  which  illumined  its  skies,  it  was 
shrouded  in  the  gloom  and  darkness  of  night,  and  was 
therefore  a  place  of  gloom  and  terror.  At  each  end  of  the 
Tuat  was  a  space  which  was  neither  wholly  darkness,  nor 
wholly  light,  the  eastern  end  being  partially  lighted  by  the 
rising  sun,  and  the  western  end  by  the  setting  sun.  Where 
these  partially  lighted  spaces  ended  "thick  darkness,"  or 
"  solid  darkness,"  i.e.,  the  "  outer  darkness,"  began. 

The  part  of  the  Tuat  that  was  close  to  Egypt  was 
a  terrible  place,  which  much  resembled  the  African  "  bush." 
Parts  of  it  were  desert,  and  parts  of  it  were  forest,  and 
parts  of  it  were  "  scrub  "  land,  and  there  were  no  "  roads  " 
through  any  part  of  it.  Tracks  there  were,  just  as  there 
are  in  the  forests  of  the  Siidan,  but  it  was  hopeless  for  the 
disembodied  soul  to  attempt  to  find  its  way  by  means  of 
them,  unless  guided  by  some  friendly  being  who  knew  the 
"  ways  "  of  that  awful  region.  Everywhere  there  was  thick 
darkness.  All  the  region  of  the  Tuat  was  inhabited,  but 
the  beings  who  dwelt  there  were  hostile  to  all  new-comers, 
and  they  could  only  be  placated  by  gifts,  or  made  sub- 
servient to  the  souls  of  the  dead  on  their  way  to  the 
kingdom  of  Osiris,  by  the  use  of  spells,  or  words  of  power. 
The  way  was  barred,  too,  by  frightful  monsters  which  lived 
on  the  souls  of  the  dead,  and  at  one  place  or  another  the 
deceased  was  obliged  to  cross  streams  which  were  fed  by 
the  river  in  the  Tuat,  and  even  the  river  itself  In  one 
part  of  this  terrible  region  was  situated  a  district  called 
"  Sekhet  Hetepet,  i.e.,  the  "  Field  of  Offerings,"  or  the 
Elysian  Fields,  and  within  this  was  a  sub-district  called 
"Sekhet  Aaru,"  z.^.,  the  "Field  of  Reeds";  in  the  latter 
lived  the  god  Osiris  and  his  court.  In  primitive  times  his 
kingdom  was  very  small,  but  gradually  it  grew,  and  at 
length  absorbed  the  whole  of  the  Tuat.  He  ruled  the 
inhabitants  thereof  much  as  an  earthly  king  ruled  men,  and 


The  Abode  of  the  Blessed  137 

from  first  to  last  there  seem  to  have  been  in  his  kingdom 
nobles,  chiefs,  and  serfs,  just  as  there  were  in  Egypt. 

The  desire  of  every  good  man  in  Egypt  was  to  go  to  the 
Kingdom  of  Osiris,  the  "  Lord  of  Souls,"  and,  as  we  learn 
from  the  "  Book  of  the  Two  Ways,"  or  the  "  Two  Ways 
of  the  Blessed  Dead,"  ^  he  might  go  there  by  water  or  by 
land.  The  difficulties  which  beset  him  if  he  went  by  land 
have  already  been  indicated,  and  if  he  attempted  to  go  there 
by  water  the  difficulties  which  he  would  have  to  encounter 
were  no  less  serious.  The  Egyptians  thought  that  the 
Nile  which  flowed  through  Egypt  was  connected  with  the 
river  in  the  Tuat,  but  to  reach  the  latter  the  deceased  would 
have  to  pass  through  the  two  holes  in  the  First  Cataract 
from  which  the  Nile  rose,  and  then  he  would  have  to  sail 
over  streams  of  fire  and  of  boiling  water  before  he  arrived 
in  port.  The  banks  of  these  streams  were  filled  with  hostile 
beings  which  sought  to  bar  his  progress,  and  lucky  indeed 
was  that  soul  which  triumphed  over  all  obstacles,  and 
reached  the  City  of  God. 

The  Theban  Recension  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead 
contains  several  Chapters  dealing  with  the  Kingdom  of 
Osiris,  and  from  these  the  following  facts  are  derived.  The 
CXLIVth  Chapter  states  that  there  were  seven  halls  or 
mansions  in  Sekhet  Aaru,  all  of  which  had  to  be  passed 
through  by  the  deceased  before  he  could  see  the  god. 
Each  door  of  each  Arit,  or  hall,  was  under  the  care  of  three 
gods  ;  the  first  was  the  doorkeeper,  the  second  kept  a  look- 
out and  acted  as  watchman,  and  the  third  questioned  the 
traveller  who  arrived,  and  reported  his  arrival  and  name  to 
Osiris  or  his  officers.  Unless  the  traveller  could  tell  each 
god  his  name,  he  was  not  permitted  to  enter  the  Arit 
guarded_  by  the  three  gods.  The  names  of  the  gods  of  the 
Seven  Arits  (Papyrus  of  Nu)  were  : — 


Arit  I. 

DOORKEEPI-.R, 

Sekhet-herashtaru  ; 

Watcher, 

Smetu  ;      Herald, 

HUKHERU. 

Arit  II. 

jj 

Tunhat; 

„ 

Seqether  ;       ,, 

Sabes. 

Arit  III. 

J, 

Unemhuatentpehuif; 

„ 

Resher;            ,, 

Uaau. 

Arit  IV. 

■' 

Khesefherashtkheru 

Resab;              ,, 

Neteqaher- 
khesefatu. 

Arit  V. 

" 

Ankhemfentu ; 

'• 

Ashebu  ;            ,, 

Tebher- 
kehaat. 

Arit  VI. 

'• 

Akentaukhakheru  ; 

•• 

Anher  ;             ,, 

Metesher- 

ARISHE. 

Akit  VII. 

'• 

Metessen; 

" 

Aakheru;        ,, 

Khesefher- 

KHEMIU. 

^  See  the  version  published  by  Schack-Schackenburg,  Das  Buck  von  den 
Zwei  IVegen  des  Seligen  Toten  (Leipzig,  1903),  from  a  cofifin  at  Berlin. 


138  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

From  another  Chapter  in  the  same  Papyrus  (CXLVI) 
we  learn  that  the  Secret  Gates  of  the  House  of  Osiris  in 
Sekhet  Aaru  were  ten  in  number,  and  the  names  of  the 
Gates  and  of  their  keepers  were  : — 

Gate  I.  Nebt-setau-qat-sebt-hert-nebt-khebkhebt- 

SERT-METU-KHESFET-NESHNIU-NEHMET-AUAI- 
EN-I-UAU. 

Gatekeeper.     Neri. 
Gate        II.  Nebt-pet-hent-taui-nesbit-nebt-tememu- 
tent-bu-nebu. 
Gatekeeper.     Mes-peh  or  Mes-Ptah. 
Gate      III.  Nebt-khaut-aat-aabet-senetchmet-neter- 
neb-ams-hru-khent-er-abtu. 
Gatekeeper.     Ertatsebanqa. 
Gate       IV.  Sekhmet-tesu-hent-taui-hetchet-khefti- 
nu-urt-ab-arit-saru-shut-em-au. 
Gatekeeper.     Nekau. 
Gate        V.  Khet-nebt-rekhu-resht-tebhet-tatu-nes- 

AN-AQ-ERES-UN-TEP-F. 

Gatekeeper.     Hentirequ. 
Gate      VI.  Nebt-senket-aat-hemhemet-an-rekhtu-qas- 

ER-USEKH-S-AN-QEMTU-QET-S-EM-SHAA-AU- 
HEFAU-HER-S-AN-REKH-TENNU-MES-ENTHU- 

kher-hat-urtu-ab. 
Gatekeeper.     Smamti. 
Gate    VII.  Akkit- hebset-bak- Aakhebit-mert-sehap- 
khat. 
Gatekeeper.     Akenti. 
Gate  VIII.  Rekhet-besu-akhmet-tchafu-sept-pau-khat- 

TET-SMAM-AN-NETCHNETCH-ATET-SESH-HER- 

SEN-SENT-NAH-S. 

Gatekeeper.     Khutciietf. 
Gate      IX.  Amt-hat-nebt-user-iiert-ab-mestet-neb-s- 

KHET-SHAA- -EM  - SHEN -S - SATU -  EM - 

UATCIIET -SHEMA-THESET- BES- HEBSET-BAK - 
FEQAT-NEB-S-RX-NEB. 

Gatekeeper.     Tchesef. 
Gate        X.  Qat-kheru-neiieset-tenatu-sebhet-er-qa- 

en  -  kheru  -  s  -  nert- nebt- shefsheft- an - 

tern-s-netet-em-khennu-s. 
Gatekeeper.     Sekhenur. 


The  Abode  of  the  Blessed  139 

Some  papyri  add  four,  or  six,  or  eleven  other  Gates  to 
the  above  series  of  ten,  but  though  they  give  their  names  in 
full  they  do  not  supply  the  names  of  their  keepers.  The 
original  number  of  the  Gates  appears  to  have  been  ten.  It 
will  be  noted  that  the  name  of  each  Gate  consists  of  an 
address  to  it,  in  which  many  honorific  titles  occur,  and  that 
the  name  is  really  a  many-worded  spell. 

From  another  Chapter  (CXLIX)  we  learn  that  Sekhet 
Aaru  was  divided  into  Fifteen  Aats,  or  Regions,  each  of 
which  was  presided  over  by  a  god.  The  First  Aat  was 
called  "  Amentet,"  and  the  dwellers  therein  lived  on  the 
offerings  which  were  made  to  them  ;  the  god  who  ruled  it 
was  Menuqet.  The  Second  Aat  was  called  "  Sekhet 
Aaru,"  and  the  walls  which  surrounded  it  were  made  of  the 
material  which  forms  the  sky  {bad).  Its  god  was  Ra  Heru- 
Khuti,  and  the  inhabitants  thereof  were  Spirit-souls  who 
were  nine  cubits  high.  The  wheat  and  the  barley  which 
grew  there  were  five  and  seven  cubits  high  respectively. 
This  Aat  seems  to  have  been  the  centre  of  the  Kingdom  of 
Osiris.  The  Third  Aat  was  called  the  Aat  of  the  Spirit- 
souls,  and  was  a  place  of  blazing  fire;  it  was  ruled  over  by 
Ra  or  Osiris.  The  Fourth  Aat  was  called  "  Tui-qaui- 
aaui,"  and  its  extent  was  300  measures  by  230  measures. 
Its  ruler  was  the  monster  serpent  *'  Sati-temui,"  which  was 
seventy  cubits  long,  and  which  lived  by  slaughtering  the 
Spirit-souls  and  the  dead  who  were  in  the  Tuat.  There  was 
another  serpent  in  this  Aat  called  '*  Akriu,"  and  it  appears 
to  have  been  an  enemy  of  Ra.  The  Fifth  Aat  was 
inhabited  by  Spirit-souls  whose  thighs  were  seven  cubits 
long  ;  they  lived  upon  the  shadows  of  the  helpless  and 
weak.  They  owed  fealty  to  Osiris,  for  the  deceased  adjured 
them  in  the  name  of  Osiris,  the  Great  Spirit-soul,  to  let 
him  pass  over  their  roads.  The  Sixth  Aat  was  called 
"  Amhet,"  and  was  ruled  by  a  god  in  the  form  of  a  worm 
called  "  Sekher  At."  It  was  a  place  sacred  to  the  gods, 
but  was  a  region  of  mystery  to  the  Spirit-souls,  and  was 
unsuitable  for  the  dead.  The  Seventh  Aat  was  called 
Ases,  and  was  situated  in  a  remote  place,  full  of  fire.  The 
lord  of  this  Aat  was  a  serpent,  with  a  back  seven  cubits  long. 
It  was  gifted  with  the  evil  eye,  and  it  first  fascinated  Spirit- 
souls  and  then  destroyed  them.  It  had  a  mortal  enemy 
in  the  Lynx-goddess  Maftet,  which  bit  off  its  head.      No 


140  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

soul  wished  to  meet  it,  or  to  come  in  its  way,  and  only  the 
words  of  power  which  a  soul  possessed  enabled  it  to  escape 
death  through  its  venom.  The  Eighth  Aat.  This  Aat 
was  called  "  Hahetep,"  and  it  was  under  the  rule  of  a  god 

called  "  Qa-hahetep,"  T  fD  '^^  ^      ,  and  it  appears  to  have 

contained  an  underground  canal  which  was  connected  with 
this  earth  ;  at  one  part  of  it  was  a  sort  of  well,  and  the 
noise  made  by  the  waters  as  they  entered  it,  and  their 
roar  as  they  rushed  out  was  greatly  terrifying.  One 
creature  was  able  to  pass  over  this  region,  namely  the 
Ennur  bird,  with  which  the  deceased  identified  himself 
In  this  Aat  he  was  obliged  to  make  offerings  to  the  "  lords 
of  offerings,"  otherwise  the  fiends  would  carry  him  off  to 
the  block  where  the  sacrifices  to  the  gods  were  slaughtered. 
The  Ninth  Aat  was  called  "  Aksi,"  and  not  even  the  gods 
knew  exactly  where  it  was.  It  was  ruled  over  by  the 
"  holy  god  who  dwelt  in  his  Ggg,"  and  who  terrified  both 
gods  and  Spirit-souls  ;  no  one  could  enter  or  leave  the 
region  without  this  god's  consent.  At  the  entrance  to  the 
Aat  was  a  mighty  fire,  the  heat,  fumes,  and  vapours  of 
which  destroyed  the  nostrils  and  mouths  of  any  who  tried 
to  pass  through  it ;  only  the  god  of  the  Aat  could  breathe 
its  air  with  impunity,  or  those  who  formed  his  bodyguard. 
The  souls  who  wished  to  pass  through  this  Aat  without 
being  consumed  were  obliged  to  make  obeisance  to  the 
god,  and  then  to  obtain  permission  to  become  one  of  his 
bodyguard.  The  Tenth  Aat  was  likewise  a  region  of 
terror,  and  it  was  ruled  over  by  a  god  who  carried 
a  butcher's  knife  in  each  hand,  and  bore  a  serpent  on  his 
head.  Among  the  vSerpent-gods  who  lived  here  were  the 
awful  beings  Nau  and   Nehebkau,  and  they  fed   upon  the 

Spirit-souls  and  the  shadows  T  ^  of  the  dead.    The  deceased 

was  obliged  to  make  offerings  to  these  gods,  to  burn  myrrh, 
and  to  slaughter  animals,  and  even  so  he  could  not  pass 
through  the  Aat  unharmed  unless  I  sis  and  Nephthys  were 
his  companions.  The  Eleventh  Aat  was  in  Khert-Neter, 
and  its  chief  town  was  called  "  Atu."  Its  ruler  had  the 
form  of  a  jackal-headed  man,  and  he  was  armed  with  two 
slaughtering-knives.  The  Aat  was  situated  among  hills, 
or  on  a  hill  with  terraces.     The  deceased  who  wished  to 


The  Abode  of  the  Blessed  141 

pass  through  this  Aat  armed  himself  with  the  knife  where- 
with Horus  mutilated  Set,  and  against  this  weapon  no  other 
weapon  could  prevail.  Even  so,  the  deceased  was  obliged 
to  declare  that  he  was  Ra,  and  that  his  strength  was  due  to 
the  Eye  of  Horus.  It  will  be  remembered  that  when  Osiris 
had  been  mummified,  and  when  his  body  was  still  without 
life,  Horus  brought  his  Eye,  which  he  had  taken  out  of 
the  possession  of  Set,  and  gave  it  to  his  father  to  eat. 
Osiris  swallowed  the  Eye,  and  immediately  he  became 
a  living  being.  The  deceased  also  took  the  form  of  the 
Smen  goose,  the  cackling  of  which  pleased  the  gods,  and 
he  rose  like  a  god,  being  filled  with  the  divine  food  of  the 
Field  of  Offerings.  Then  was  he  able  to  set  up  a  ladder, 
and  to  climb  up  by  its  means  to  the  place  where  the  gods 
and  the  imperishable  stars  were,  and  his  speech  became 
like  that  of  the  beings  who  dwell  in  the  star  Sept  (the 
Dog-star,  or  Sothis).  The  Twelfth  Aat  was  close  to 
Rasta,  and  its  chief  town  was  called  "  Unt."  It  also  was 
a  place  full  of  fire,  and  the  souls  of  the  dead  were  unable  to 
approach  it  by  reason  of  the  uraei  which  attacked  all  comers. 
The  Thirteenth  Aat.  This  Aat  was  also  a  region  of 
fire,  and  the  streams  which  flowed  through  it  were  of 
boiling  water.  It  was  a  place  which  caused  the  Spirit-souls 
great  trouble,  for  though  they  wished  to  drink  and  quench 
their  thirst  they  were  unable  to  do  so,  because  of  the  fear 
with  which  the  fire  inspired  them.  The  god  who  presided 
over  the  region  was  a  hippopotamus,  which  we  see  repre- 
sented with  one  forefoot  resting  on  a  beetle.  His  name 
appears  to  be  Hebt-re-f,  and  he  was  the  symbol  of  the 
celestial  river  of  which  the  Nile  was  the  continuation  on 
earth.  The  deceased  could  only  gain  power  over  the 
waters  of  this  region  by  the  help  of  this  god,  whose  chief 

place  of  abode  in  it  was  called  "  Uart-ent-mu  "  ^  ^^^aaa. 

The  Fourteenth  Aat  is  called  "  Kheraha,"  and  it  appears 
to  have  been  a  region  through  which  a  great  canal  flowed, 
and  to  have  contained  many  lakes.  The  name  suggests 
that  the  Aat  was  the  celestial  equivalent  of  the  region 
which  lay  between  the  Nile  and  the  ancient  city  of  Helio- 
polis.  There  appears  to  be  in  the  text  that  describes 
this  Aat  an  allusion  to  a  great  canal  which  was  fed  directly 
from  the  Nile,  and  flowed  through  the  whole  district  until 


142  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

at  lenofth  it  reached  the  sfreat  canal  which  flowed  into  the 
Bitter  Lakes.  The  modern  equivalent  of  the  canal  of 
Kher-aha  was  the  great  Khalig  Canal,  at  the  mouth  of 
which  the  famous  ceremony  of  "cutting  the  dam"  was 
performed  annually.  Somewhere  near  the  mouth  a  bride 
was  offered  to  the  Nile-god  annually.  The  allusion  to  the 
Serpent-god  who  guarded  the  two  caverns  at  Elephantine, 
through  which  the  Nile-god  poured  his  waters  into  Egypt, 
and  to  the  town  of  Tetu  (Busiris)  proves  that  we  are  here 
dealing  with  one  of  the  principal  domains  of  Osiris. 

In  the  great  papyri  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead,  according 
to  the  Theban  Recension,  we  find  detailed  pictures  of  the 
Field  of  Offerings  and  the  Field  of  Reeds,  wherein  the 
followers  of  Osiris  hoped  to  enjoy  a  life  of  everlasting  bliss. 
As  these  regions  have  been  described  in  connection  with 
the  Vignette  of  Chapter  CX  (see  Vol  I,  pp.  107  ff.),  and 
a  translation  of  the  text  of  the  Chapter  has  also  been  given 
in  the  Second  Volume,  there  is  no  need  to  discuss  them 
further  here. 

In  addition  to  the  Chapters  already  mentioned,  there 
are  other  sources  of  information  about  the  Tuat  or  Other 
World  of  the  Egyptians,  and  of  these  the  principal  works 
are  the  "  Book  of  him  that  is  in  the  Tuat,"  and  the 
"  Book  of  Gates. "^  The  Book  Am  Tuat,  or  Ami  Tuat, 
describes  the  journey  which  the  Sun-god  makes  through 
the  Tuat,  after  he  has  set  upon  this  world.  As  the 
Sun-god  approaches  the  ante-chamber  or  vestibule  of  the 
Tuat  in  the  west,  the  gods  who  are  in  charge  of  his  boat 
steer  directly  for  the  entrance  to  the  Tuat.  The  Sun-god 
takes  the  form  of  a  man-headed  ram,  and  stands  within  a 
shrine,  in  other  words,  he  takes  the  form  of  Osiris,  so  that 
he  may  pass  safely  through  the  Kingdom  of  the  dead, 
which  is  ruled  by  Osiris.      In  this  form  the  Sun-god  is  called 

Af  Ra  (jJ^O,    "flesh    of   Ra,"    i.e.,    the    dead    body    of 

Osiris.  As  he  approaches,  the  Ape-gods  and  the  other 
gods  and  goddesses  sing  praises  to  him,  and  serpents 
belch  forth  fire,  which  provides  the  light  that  enables  his 
Pilot-gods  to  steer  his  boat.  The  doors  which  bar  the  way 
are  thrown  open  by  the  gods,  and  Af  Ra  proceeds  on  his  way 

1  See  my  editions  of  the  Book  Am    Tuat,  the  Book  of  Gates,  and  the 
Egyptian  Heaven  and  Hell,  London,  1905. 


The  Abode  of  the  Blessed  143 

over  the  waters  of  the  river  of  the  Tuat.  The  Hght  from 
the  boat  wakes  the  dead  who  are  there  to  hfe,  and  the  air 
which  Af  Ra  carries  with  him  enables  them  to  live  acjain 
for  an  hour.  Every  being  that  ministers  to  the  god,  and 
every  creature  in  this  section  of  the  Tuat  receive  meat 
and  drink  by  the  command  of  Af  Ra.  The  dead  whom  he 
finds  here  are  souls  who  for  some  cause  or  other  have 
failed  to  find  their  way  to  the  realm  of  Osiris,  and  they  are 
only  saved  from  utter  destruction  by  the  light,  air,  and  food 
which  they  receive  from  Af  Ra.  When  the  god  reaches 
the  entrance  to  the  Second  Section  of  the  T^at,  the  goddess 
of  the  Hour  and  the  other  gods  of  the  section  leave  him, 
and  return  to  their  places  to  await  his  arrival  on  the 
foUowino-  nicrht. 

The  Second  Section  of  the  T^at  is  called   "  Urnes  " 
"^^^t —<*— ,  as  is  also  the  river  which  flows  throuo-h   it.      It 


lay  to  the  north  of  the  ante-chamber  already  described, 
and  was  situated  in  the  domain  of  Osiris  Khenti  Amenti, 
which  included  the  territory  of  Abydos.  The  Boat  of 
Af  Ra  is  now  accompanied  by  the  boats  of  Osiris  and  his 
attendant  gods,  and  when  it  arrives  in  Urnes  the  god 
addresses  the  inhabitants  of  the  district,  who  are  called 
"  Baiu  TiJatiu,"  or  "  Souls  of  the  Tuat,"  and  orders  them  to 
receive  from  him  food,  light,  and  air  in  return  for  their 
labours  which  they  have  performed  on  his  behalf.  Af  Ra 
destroys  the  serpents   Hau  and   Neha-her,  and   the  gods 

lead  him  into  the  Field  of  the  Grain-gods  IJ^lJ^q        a    '^  Jj, 

where  for  a  time  he  rests.  Here  Af  Ra  held  converse 
with  the  Souls  of  Urnes,  and  he  received  the  prayers  of 
the  living  on  behalf  of  the  dead,  and  noted  the  offerings 
which  were  made  by  them.  The  pictures  of  this  section 
of  the  Tuat  and  the  descriptive  texts  were  believed  to 
possess  special  efficacy,  and  copies  of  them  are  tolerably 
numerous ;  they  benefited  the  souls  of  the  dead,  and 
protected  the  bodies  of  those  who  had  them  made  on  earth. 
In  Urnes  only  the  followers  of  Osiris  and  Ra  were  to 
be  found. 

The  Third  Section  of  the  Tuat  is  called  "  Net- 
nebuakheperaut,"  and  is  a  continuation  of  the  Kingdom  of 
Osiris  ;  in  it  is  the  House  of  the  Tet,  wherein  Osiris 
himself  dwells.     The  Boat  of  Af  Ra  is   escorted  over  the 


144  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 


AA^'AAA     A/NAAAA 


waters  of  the  river  Net-Asar  ^^^^^^     u     by  a  number 

of  boats    which    are     specially     created     by     Osiris,    and 
arrives    at   the    head   of  the   stream  on  which  the  throne 
of  Osiris   is  placed.      Here  the  god  sits  surrounded  by  his 
followers  who  are  described  as  "  Baiu  Shetaiu,"  or  "hidden 
souls."     The  banks  of  the  stream  are  lined  with  gods  who 
have  been  told  off  by  Osiris   to  minister  to   the  wants  of 
Af  Ra  and  to  make  his  boat  to  travel  in  safety  through 
the   region.     The    duties   of    the    servants    of    Osiris    in 
this    section    may    be    thus    described  :     I.   They    protect 
Nu,  the  god  of  the  great  celestial  ocean  from   which   rose 
the   river  which  on   earth  was  known   as   "  Hap,"  or  the 
Nile,    from   the    attacks    of    the    legion    of    devils    called 
"  Seba."     These  devils  were  the  active  servants    of  Set, 
the   god   of  chaos,   darkness,    and    destruction,    and    they 
endeavoured    to    prevent    the    Nile    from     rising    at     its 
appointed  time,  and  tried  by  every  means  in  their  power 
to  fetter  its  waters  during  its  annual  inundation.     At  times 
Seba   succeeded    in    arresting   the    inundation,    and    then 
Egypt  was  attacked   by   famine.     2.  They    hack  souls  in 
pieces,    they   imprison  the  shadows    of    the    dead.     They 
carry  out  the  death  sentence  on  those  who  are  doomed  to 
be  destroyed  in  a  place  of  fire,  and  they  make  and  maintain 
the  fires  by  which  such  beings  are  to  be  consumed.     The 
"  souls  "  and  "  shadows  "  here  referred  to   must  belong  to 
the  dead  who  have  reached  this   place,   but   who  through 
sin    committed    upon    earth,     and    through    the    lack    of 
offerings    made   to   them  upon   earth,    have  failed   to  find 
nourishment    and    have    perished    in    consequence.     With 
them,  too,  are  joined  the  souls  which  have  been  condemned 
in  the  Judgment  by  Osiris,  and  the  souls   of  those    who 
have  rebelled  against  Ra.     The  execution  and  the  burning 
of  the  damned  take  place  soon  after  midnight  each  day, 
and  thus  the   Kingdom  of  Osiris  is  cleared  of  the  wicked, 
and  the  Boat  of   Af  Ra  can  pursue  its  course  unhindered 
by  them.      In  return  for  these  services  the   gods    receive 
daily  rations  from  their  god,  and  they  rejoice  so  greatly 
in  his  light,  that  as  soon  as    he    leaves    their    region    in 
darkness,  they  begin  to  weep  and    lament,    and    to    sigh 
for  his  return  on  the  following  day. 

From  the  Kingdom  of  Osiris  the  Boat  of  Af  Ra  passes 
northwards  to  the  Fourth  Section  of  the  Tuat,  or  the  realm 


The  Abode  of  the  Blessed  145 


of  Seker  ^^^n:^  Ji ,  an  ancient  Death-god,  who  is  probably- 
far  older  than  Osiris,  and  whose  territory  lay  a  little 
to  the  south  of  Memphis.  Here  serious  difficulties 
awaited  Af  Ra,  for  there  was  no  river  in  Ra-stau,  the 
kingdom  of  Seker,  and  his  boat  was  therefore  useless. 
Here  the  half-light  of  the  Kingdom  of  Osiris  was 
exchanged  for  the  blackest  darkness,  and  the  fertile  fields 
and  the  streams  of  the  Field  of  Offerings  were  exchanged 
for  rocks,  and  mountains,  and  deserts,  filled  with  winged 
serpents,  and  serpents  with  two  or  three  heads,  and 
monsters  of  most  terrifying  aspect.  Af  Ra  is,  however, 
bound  to  traverse  these  on  his  way  northward,  and 
compelled  by  his  words  of  power  the  gods  of  Ra-stau  take 
him  out  of  his  own  boat,  and  lead  him  by  way  of 
subterranean  corridors  and  galleries  in  the  rock  through, 
or  rather  above,  the  awful  Kingdom  of  Death.  The 
vehicle  in  which  he  travels  is  no  longer  a  boat,  but  is  the 
body  of  a  serpent,  which  glides  easily  through  the 
passages  of  the  rock.  Very  few  gods  attend  him  on  his 
journey,  but  among  them  are  Thoth,  Horus,  and  the 
servants  of  Anpu.  Each  passage  has  several  doors  in 
it,  and  everywhere  are  servants  of  Seker  in  the  form  of 
rnonster  serpents  which,  apparently  unwillingly,  assist 
Af  Ra  on  his  way.  At  no  part  of  the  journey  does 
Af  Ra  meet  Seker,  and  the  dead  Sun-god  takes  care  to 
avoid  that  portion  of  Ra-stau  where  Death  sits  in  majesty, 
with  deadly  serpents  and  monsters  about  him.  The 
sanctuary  of  Seker,  as  we  see  from  the  pictures  of  the 
Fifth  Section  of  the  Tuat,  is  enclosed  by  a  wall  of 
sand.  This  god  is  in  the  form  of  a  man  but  has  a  hawk's 
head  and  a  pair  of  wings,  which  emerge  from  the  back 
of  a  two-headed  serpent.  The  shrine  of  Seker  is 
pyramidal  in  form,  and  is  filled  with  the  blackest  darkness. 
As  Af  Ra  passes  it,  the  Beetle  of  Khepera  enters  his 
boat,  and  the  revivification  of  the  dead  Sun-god  begins. 

This  part  of  Ra-stau  is  called  Amhet  AU  ^^ — °?  "^  ,  and 

here  is  situated  the  stream  of  fire,  or  boiling  water,  in 
which  were  burned,  or  boiled,  those  who  had  incurred  the 
displeasure  of  Seker.  A  company  of  the  gods  and  a 
goddess  presided  over  this  place,  and  it  was  their  duty 
to  carry  out  the  executions   decreed   by  the  gods.      Each 

VOL.    I.  L 


146  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

god  was  provided  with  a  block  of  slaughter,  on  which  he 
hacked  the  dead  to  pieces,  and  this  done  he  cast  the  pieces 
into  the  fire  which  he  produced  from  his  own  body  ; 
the  goddess  lived  partly  on  the  blood  of  the  dead,  and 
partly  on  rations  decreed  to  her  by  the  gods.  We  may 
note  in  passing,  that  no  provision  for  the  beatified 
existed  in  the  kingdom  of  Seker,  and  it  seems  as  if  the 
priests  of  this  ancient  god  assumed  that  with  his  death  a 
man  came  to  an  end  eternally. 

Meanwhile  the  Boat  of  Af  Ra  moves  on,  assisted  by 
the  gods  of  the  dead  of  Seker,  and  at  length  it  reaches  the 
waters  which  existed  on  the  northern  boundary  of  his 
kingdom.  Here  the  god  leaves  his  serpent-boat,  and 
re-enters  his  river-boat,  which  by  some  means  has  been 
transported  to  the  entrance  of  the  Sixth  Section  of  the 
Tuat.  The  Sixth  Section  of  the  Tuat  lies  to  the  north  of 
the  realm  of  Seker,  and  Afu  Ra  traverses  it  in  a  boat.  It 
is  called  Metchet-mu-nebt-Tuat,  and  contains  the  abodes 
of  the  dead  kings  of  Egypt  and  of  the  Khu,  or  Spirit- 
souls.  As  Afu  Ra  passed  through  it  he  saluted  all  the 
dwellers  there  and  besought  them  to  slay  Aapep  for 
him  ;  in  return  for  their  services  he  decreed  them  offerings 
in  abundance.  In  the  pictures  of  this  section,  we  see 
Afu  Ra  lying  on  the  back  of  the  five-headed  serpent 
Ash-heru,  which  has  its  body  bent  over  him  to  protect 
him.  On  the  head  of  the  god  is  the  Beetle  of  Khepera, 
symbol  of  resurrection.  At  this  point  in  his  journey, 
Afu  Ra  begins  to  travel  towards  the  east,  and  to  direct 
his  course  to  the  Mountain  of  the  Sunrise,    i.e.,    Bakhau 

Jl^^^^v*^^^  V  ■  Hitherto,  he  has  been  travelling 
from  south  to  north.  All  the  gods  of  this  section  assist 
Afu  Ra  on  his  way,  and  the  monster  serpent  Unem-Khu 
devours  the  shadows  of  the  dead  and  the  spirits  of  the 
enemies  of  the  Sun-god.  Among  them  are  the  Four 
Sons  of  Horus,  who  spring  into  being  from  the  back  of 
Unem-Khu  as  soon  as  they  hear  the  voice  of  Af  Ra,  and 
the  Four  Forms  of  Osiris,  and  the  Nine  Serpents,  which 
represent  the  gods  Tathenn,  Temu,  Khepera,  Shu,  Keb, 
Asar  (Osiris),  Horus,  Afu,  and  Hetepui. 

The  Seventh  Section  of  the  Tuat  is  called  "  Thephet- 
shetat,"  or  the  "  Hidden  Region,"  and  it  is  a  continuation 


The  Abode  of  the  Blessed  147 

of  the  "  secret  road  of  Amenti,"  on  which  Afu  Ra  began 
to  travel  in  the  Sixth  Section.  The  face  of  Afu  Ra  is  now 
turned  in  the  other  direction,  and  his  crew  is  strengthened 
by  the  addition  of  Isis  and  Ser,  or  Semsu.  His  boat  has 
now  to  travel  through  a  region  of  swamps  and  shallows,  and 
the  path  of  the  god  is  obstructed  by  the  serpent  Aapep  or 
Neha-her,  which  lies  on  a  sand-bank  450  cubits  long. 
The  goddess  Serqet  and  the  god  Herthesuf  drive  their 
knives  through  his  body,  and  fetter  his  tail  and  head,  and 
so  the  boat  of  Afu  Ra  moves  onward.  He  passes  the 
tombs  of  the  Form  of  Tem,  the  Form  of  Khepera,  the 
Form  of  Ra,  and  the  Form  of  Osiris,  and  he  sees  on  the 
posts  of  the  tombs  the  heads  of  those  who  were  buried  in 
the  foundations  when  these  tombs  were  built.  These 
heads  appear  when  they  hear  the  voice  of  Afu  Ra,  and 
they  disappear  as  soon  as  he  has  passed.  The  boat  of 
Afu  Ra  is  helped  onward  by  the  twelve  gods  and  twelve 
goddesses  of  the  Hours,  and  it  passes  the  monster  crocodile 
Abshe-am-Tuat,  which  lies  over  the  tomb  of  Osiris. 
Further  on  is  Afu  Asar  seated  on  a  throne  watching  the 
destruction  of  his  enemies  through  decapitation  by  the 
Lynx-goddess  Maftet  ;  numbers  of  them  are  bound  in 
chains  held  in  the  hands  of  the  god  Anku. 

When  Afu  Ra  enters  the  Eighth  Section  of  the  Tuat, 
which  is  called  "  Tebat-neterus,"  he  is  towed  by  a  company 
of  gods.  He  sees  the  Four  Forms  of  Tathenn,  which 
are  preceded  by  the  bodyguard  of  Ra,  and  he  passes  a 
series  of  Circles  wherein  dwell  gods.  Those  on  the 
right  are  Hetepjetnebs,  Hetemet  Khemiu,  Hapsemus, 
Sehertbaius,  and  Aatsetekau  ;  the  door's  name  is  Tesamen- 
mitemshetaf  The  Circles  on  the  left  are  Sesheta,  Tuat, 
Asneteru,  Aakebi,  and  Nebtsemunifu  ;  the  door's  name  is 
Teskhaibitutuatiu.  As  Afu  Ra  passes,  he  addresses  words 
to  the  gods  of  the  Circles,  and  the  doors  fly  open,  and 
they  reply  to  the  god  with  sounds  like  the  mewing  of  male 
cats,  the  hum  of  the  living,  the  cry  of  the  hawk,  the 
screams  of  waterfowl  in  their  nests,  the  hum  of  bees, 
the  noise  of  weeping,  the  sounds  made  by  bulls,  and 
shrieks  of  terror. 

The  boat  of  Afu  Ra  moves  through  the  Ninth 
Section  of  the  Tuat,  which  is  called  "  Bestaruankhet- 
kheperu,"    without    the    aid    of    towing    or    rowing    gods. 

L  2 


148  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

The  god  is  in  the  form  of  the  serpent  Mehen,  and  he 
is  accompanied  by  twelve  Sailor-gods,  who  sing  to  him, 
and  scatter  water  with  their  paddles  on  the  beings  who 
line  the  banks.  The  path  of  the  god  is  lighted  by 
twelve  uraei,  who  pour  out  fire  from  their  mouths,  and 
at  the  end  of  the  section  Afu  Ra  passes  the  field- 
labourers,  who  cultivate  the  fields  of  Osiris  under  the 
direction  of  Horus,  Governor  of  the  Lake  of  the  Tuat, 
and  the  Twelve  Taskmasters  of  Osiris  (the  Tchatchau), 
and  the  twelve  goddesses,  who  weave  the  linen  garments 
which  are  required  in  the  section. 

The  Tenth  and  Eleventh  Sections  of  the  Tuat 
are  called  "  Metchetqatutchebu"  and  "  Reenqerrtiptkhatu," 
and  form  part  of  the  kingdom  of  the  Sun-god  of  Anu, 
or  Heliopolis,  and  a  part  of  the  Eastern  Delta.  The 
beings  who  dwell  in  the  Tenth  Section  have  two 
duties  to  perform:  i.  to  slay  the  enemies  of  Afu  Ra  and 
to  destroy  their  bodies,  and  2.  to  help  in  the  recon- 
struction of  the  disk  of  the  sun,  which  was  to  appear 
in  the  sky  of  this  world  that  day.  The  boat  of  Afu 
Ra  now  passes  over  a  series  of  lakes,  which  seem  to 
represent  the  lagoons  of  the  Eastern  Delta,  in  which 
we  see  a  number  of  forms  of  men,  in  the  various  attitudes 
which  human  bodies  assume  as  they  are  drowning.  As 
Afu  Ra  passes  over  these  lagoons,  Horus  addresses  the 
men  drowned  in  them  and  assures  them  that  "  their 
members  shall  not  perish,  nor  their  flesh  decay,"  but  he 
makes  no  promise  to  bring  them  up,  and  to  give  them 
a  renewed  existence  on  dry  land.  This  section  contains 
many  magical  serpents,  as  well  as  gods  and  goddesses, 
and  the  mystic  sceptre,  and  they  all  help  Afu  Ra 
onward  in   his   course. 

The  boat  of  Afu  Ra  makes  its  way  through  the 
Eleventh  Section,  lighted  by  a  disk  of  light,  encircled 
by  a  serpent,  which  rests  on  the  prow  ;  this  disk  is 
called  "  Pestu."  The  tow-rope  of  the  boat  is  formed 
of  the  body  of  the  serpent  Mchen,  Afu  Ra  first  passes 
the  Red  and  White  Crowns,  and  then  arrives  in  the 
territory  of  the  town  of  Sais,  where  the  god  meets  the 
Four  Forms  of  the  goddess  Neith.  Afu  Ra  next  passes 
the  two-headed  god  Aperhernebtchet,  who  wears  two 
crowns,   and  the  mystical    forms  of  the  body   and  soul   of 


The  Abode  of  the  Blessed  149 

Temu,  and  the  body  and  soul  of  the  Star-god  Shetu. 
The  region  to  the  left  of  the  god  is  one  of  fire,  and  in 
it,  but  quite  close  to  the  boat,  stands  Horus,  who  is 
working  magic  with  the  snake-headed  boomerang  which 
he  holds  in  his  hand.  Before  him  is  the  serpent  called 
"  Set-heh,"  i.e.,  the  "eternal  Set."  Horus  is  superin- 
tending the  destruction  of  the  bodies,  souls,  shadows,  and 
heads  of  the  enemies  of  Ra,  which  is  being  effected  in  the 
pits  of  fire  before  him.  The  fire  in  the  pits  is  supplied 
from  the  bodies  of  the  goddesses  who  are  in  charge  of 
them.  In  the  first  pit,  the  victims  are  immersed  in  the 
fiery  depths  head  downwards.  When  Afu  Ra  arrives  at 
the  last  of  the  pits,  his  journey  through  the  Tuat 
proper  is  ended,  and  it  only  remains  for  him  to  pass 
through  the  ante-chamber  to  the  east  of  it,  in  order  to 
arrive  at  the  sky  of  this  world.  In  his  journey  he  has 
traversed  the  Tuat  of  Thebes,  the  Tuat  of  Osiris  of 
Abydos,  the  Tuat  of  Seker  of  Memphis,  the  Tuat  of 
Neith  of  Sais,  the  Tuat  of  Bast  of  Bubastis,  and  the 
Tuat  of  Tem  of  Anu,  or  Heliopolis,  and  he  has  followed 
a  course  which  first  went  from  south  to  north,  then  to  the 
east,  and  finally  towards  the  Mountain  of  the  Sunrise. 
Afu  Ra  has  now  reached  the  "uttermost  limit  of  thick 
darkness,"  and  arrives  at  the  Twelfth  Section  of  the 
Other  World,  which  is  called  "  Kheperkekiukhaumestu." 
This  section  contains  the  great  mass  of  Celestial  Waters 
called  Nu,  and  the  goddess  Nut,  who  is  here  the 
personification  of  the  god  of  the  morning.  We  see 
Afu  Ra  in  his  boat  as  before,  and  in  front  of  it  is  the 
Beetle  of  Khepera,  under  whose  form  the  new  sun_  is  to 
be  born.  Before  the  boat  is  the  great  serpent  Ankli- 
neteru,  and  twelve  dmkkiu-gods,  taking  hold  of  the 
tow-line,  enter  this  serpent  at  the  tail,  and,  drawing  the 
god  in  his  boat  through  the  body  of  the  serpent,  bring 
him  out  at  his  mouth.  During  his  passage  through  the 
serpent  Afu  Ra  is  transformed  into  Khepera,  and  the 
drnkkiu-gods  are  also  transformed,  and  emerge  with  him 
from  the  serpent,  and  minister  to  him  all  the  day.  Afu 
Ra,  in  the  form  of  Khepera,  is  now  towed  into  the 
sky  by  twelve  goddesses,  who  lead  him  to  Shu,  the 
god  of  the  atmosphere  and  sky  of  this  world.  Shu 
receives    Khepera,   and   places  him   in   the   opening  in  the 


150  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

semicircular  wall  which  forms  the  end  of  this  section, 
and  people  on  this  earth  see  him  in  the  form  of  a 
disk  of  light.  Afu  Ra,  in  the  form  of  a  disk  of  light, 
has  no  further  use  for  his  mummified  form  in  which  he 
traversed  the  Tuat,  and  we  see  it  cast  aside,  and  lying 
aofainst  the  rounded  end  of  the  Tuat.  As  the  disk 
appears  in  the  sky,  the  newly-born  god  of  day  is 
acclaimed  by  gods  and  goddesses,  who  destroy  any  and 
every  enemy  who  appears  in  the  presence  of  the  god, 
and  sing  hymns  to  him.  It  was  assumed  that  the  souls 
who  travelled  with  Afu  Ra  through  the  Tuat  underwent 
the  same  transformations  as  he  did,  and  were  re-born  on 
earth  with  him. 

We  may  now  consider  the  other  Guide  to  the  Tuat 
which  was  much  used  by  the  followers  of  Osiris  under  the 
XVIIIth  and  XlXth  dynasties.  This  Guide  may  be  called 
the  "  Book  of  Gates,"  because  the  most  important  features 
of  the  Tuat  according  to  this  work  were  the  Gates  and  their 
guardians.  In  the  First  Section,  i.e.,  the  Western  Vesti- 
bule, the  Sun-god  of  night  is  seen  in  the  form  of  a  beetle 
within  a  disk,  which  is  surrounded  by  a  serpent  with  volumi- 
nous folds  ;  he  rests  in  his  boat  and  is  accompanied  by  the 
gods  Sa  and  Heka,  i.e.,  the  personifications  of  knowledge  and 
the  word  of  power.  The  section  is  called  "  Set  Amentet  " 
rv>^>-/i  (1  ^^  ^,  and  its  guardian  gods  are  Set  and  Tet. 

On  each  side  of  the  boat  are  twelve  gods,  one  group  being 
"gods  of  the  mountain,"  and  the  other,  "gods  of  the 
mountain  of  the  Hidden  Land."  The  "gods  of  the  mountain  " 
are  the  offspring  of  Ra  himself,  and  they  came  into  being 
from  his  eye. 

The  Second  Section  of  the  Tuat  is  guarded  by  the 


serpent  Saset  — •»— ^^  ^  ^  '.  and  when  the  Sun-god  of 
night  enters  it  he  takes  the  form  of  a  ram-headed  man  ;  the 
Serpent-goddess  Mehen  envelops  his  shrine,  and  his  boat  is 
towed  by  four  gods,  who  are  the  gods  of  the  four  quarters 
of  the  earth.  The  work  which  Afu  Ra  does  in  this  Section 
of  Amenti  is  to  "  weigh  words  and  deeds,"  to  judge  between 
the  great  and  litde  gods,  "  to  assign  thrones  to  the  spirits, 
"  and  to  banish  the  damned  to  the  place  which  is  set  apart 
"  for  them,  and  to  destroy  their  bodies."  From  this  text  it 
is  clear  that  a  judgment  of  the  dead  took  place  in  Amenti, 


The  Abode  of  the  Blessed  151 

and  that  It  was  independent  of  the  Judgment  of  Osiris. 
The  gods  who  assist  at  the  judgment  of  Afu  Ra  Hve  on  the 
spirits  of  the  offerings  which  are  made  to  them  upon  earth, 
and  those  who  made  these  offerings  acquired  merit  before 
the  god.  The  beings  in  this  section  are  divided  into  two 
classes,  the  good  and  the  wicked,  the  former  being  ranged 
to  the  right  of  the  god,  and  the  latter  on  his  left.  The 
good  are  divided  into  two  classes,  the  Heteptiu  and  the 
Maatiu.  The  former  made  offerings  to  Ra  regularly  when 
they  were  upon  earth,  and  they  praised  him,  and  they 
recited  curses  upon  Aapep  the  Arch-enemy  of  Ra  ;  in 
return  for  these  acts  of  piety  Ra  decrees  that  offerings  shall 
be  made  to  them  in  perpetuity,  and  that  their  souls  shall 
never  be  destroyed.  The  Maatiu  are  so  called  because  they 
were  speakers  of  the  truth  upon  earth,  and  because  they 
were  not  in  the  habit  of  committing  acts  of  fraud  and  deceit. 
Moreover,  they  had  had  no   intercourse  with   the   neterit 

'^[1(1^^1,  a  word  which  seems  to  mean  "contemptible 

gods,"  i.e.,  gods  which  were  disapproved  of  by  Ra.  As 
a  reward  for  their  veracity  and  orthodoxy  they  lived  upon 
maat  food,  i.e.,  truth,  and  thus  they  became  truth  personified. 
They  had  access  to  an  abundant  supply  of  cold  water,  but 
if  any  sinful  soul  attempted  to  drink  this  water  it  turned  into 
"  fire  water,"  i.e.,  boiling  water,  and  the  soul  was  scalded. 
The  wicked  who  stand  to  the  left  of  Afu  Ra  have  their  arms 
tied  at  the  elbows  behind  their  backs,  and  that  they  are  suffer- 
ing great  agony  is  evident  from  their  bowed  backs  ;  four  of 
the  wicked  lie  dead  near  their  companions.  These  beings 
are  charged  with  blasphemy  against  Ra,  with  having  cursed 
him,  and  with  having  uttered  abuse  of  Khuti,  the  Sun-god 
on  the  horizon  ;  besides  this  they  thrust  aside  the  right. 
These  "  Stau,"  or  apostates,  were  condemned  to  fetters  for 
an  indefinite  period,  and  then  their  bodies  were  to  be  cut  to 
pieces  and  their  souls  annihilated.  The  texts  which  describe 
this  section  of  the  Tuat  prove  beyond  all  doubt  that  those 
who  were  righteous  upon  earth  received  good  gifts  and 
eternal  life  in  the  Tuat,  and  that  the  wicked  were  punished 
with  tortures  and  destruction.  The  making  of  propitiatory 
sacrifices  and  offerings  is  distinctly  encouraged,  and  the 
texts  prove  that  such  were  of  great  value  both  to  the 
dwellers  in  the  Tuat  and  to  their  kinsfolk  upon  earth. 


152  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

The  Third  Section  of  the  Tuat  is  approached  through 

is    guarded    by    the 


a     gate      called     "  Septt-Uauau " 
i.e.,    "  provided   with    flames,"    whic 


serpent  Aqbi  "^^^J  ufl  ^=^-  Afu  Ra  passes  through  this 
gate  unharmed,  for  at  the  word  of  Sa  the  flames  turned 
aside,  and  the  warders  withdrew  their  opposition.  Afu  Ra 
next  passes  through  the  "  Boat  of  the  Earth,"  which  is  in 
the  form  of  a  long  tunnel  with  a  bull's  head  at  each  end  of 
it.  It  is  supported  by  eight  gods,  and  guarded  by  seven 
gods  who  sit  upon  it,  and  it  was  the  abode  of  the  Earth-god 

3 .     Afu  Ra  next  passes  the  twelve  shrines  of  the  holy 

gods,  and  at  his  word  their  doors  fly  open,  and  they  salute  him ; 
in  return  for  this  Afu  Ra  gives  them  food  and  air,  and  when 
he  has  passed  the  doors  close  again,  and  the  gods  inside 
lament  and  bewail  his  departure.  A  little  further  on  are 
twelve  gods  who  are  partially  immersed  in  the  Lake  of 
Boiling  Water,  the  stench  of  which  is  so  strong  that  birds 
betake  themselves  to  flight  as  soon  as  they  see  this  Lake. 
The  description  of  this  Lake  given  in  the  text  recalls  the 
words  of  Diodorus  Siculus  (II,  48  ;  XIX,  48)  about  the 
a(T(f)aXTlTLs  }^LfM7)v,  and  suggests  that  the  writer  had  in  mind 
the  hot  sulphur  springs  which  exist  in  some  parts  of  the 
Sudan,  or  the  hot  springs  of  the  Oasis  of  Khargah.  The 
quaint  costume  of  the  gods  suggest  that  they  were  foreigners. 
Before  each  god  is  a  ke7ntet  plant,  which  was  used  in  making 
beer,  and  Afu  Ra  decrees  to  him  a  regular  supply  of  bread 
and  vegetables.  Three  serpents  now  attempt  to  block  the 
way  of  Afu  Ra.  The  first  of  these,  Aapep,  collapses  as  the 
result  of  the  utterance  of  a  word  of  power  by  Temu,  and 
lies  spell-bound.  The  Tchatchau  gods  smash  his  head, 
and  make  gashes  in  his  body.  The  serpents  Seba  and  Af 
are  attacked  by  the  gods  Nebu-khert,  and  they  likewise 
are  spell-bound,  and  reduced  to  helplessness.  All  these 
gods  live  upon  the  same  food  as  Ra,  but  they  also  partake 
of  the  spirits  of  the  offerings  which  are  made  to  Khenti 
Amenti,  a  very  ancient  god  of  the  dead  who  was  worshipped 
at  Abydos.  As  Afu  Ra  leaves  this  Section  the  Tchatchau 
and  the  other  gods  lament,  and  return  to  its  entrance  to 
await  the  arrival  of  the  god  on  the  following  night.     In  this 


The  Abode  of  the  Blessed  153 

Section  we  find  no  place  for  the  dead  or  for  the  souls  of 
human  beings. 

The  Fourth  Section   of  the  Tuat  is  protected  by  a 

Gate   which    is    called    "  Nebtstchefau "  -^^  ^  .      > 

and  is  guarded  by  the  serpent  Tchetbi  '^  J  4r  ^^  ^^^ 
Ra  enters  it  he  sees  the  sepulchres  of  the  gods  who  form 
the  bodyguard  of  Osiris,  and  comes  to  the  twelve  Hour- 
goddesses,  who  are  divided  into  two  groups,  six  in  each 
group,  by  the  monster  serpent  Herrt,  which  spawns  twelve 
serpents.  Afu  Ra  orders  the  gods  who  tow  his  boat  to  take 
him  to  the  habitations  of  the  god  Ares,  or  Sar  ^s:-|i^, 

and  on  his  arrival  there  he  raises  up  to  life  the  "broken 
souls,"  and  apportions  them  meat  and  drink.  On  the  right 
of  Afu  Ra  are  the  twelve  gods  who  carry  their  Kau,  or 
Doubles,  which  they  offer  to  the  god.  Afu  Ra  next  passes 
the  Lake  of  Life,  and  the  Lake  of  the  Living  Uraei. 
Round  the  former  stand  twelve  jackal-headed  gods  who 
invite  the  god  to  bathe  in  it,  and  say  that  its  waters  are  too 
holy  for  any  soul  of  the  dead  to  approach.  From  the  latter 
the  uraei  drive  away  every  soul  which  attempts  to  approach 
it,  and  the  words  which  they  utter  are  so  terrible  that  they 
destroy  the  shadows  of  the  dead  which  have  succeeded  in 
getting  near  it.  Further  on  Afu  Ra  passes  the  shrine  of 
Khenti  Amenti,  who  appears  in  mummy  form,  wears  the 
White  Crown,  and  stands  on  a  serpent.  Two  companies 
of  gods  stand  by  the  shrine,  and  Heru-ur,  one  of  the  oldest 
gods  of  Egypt,  addresses  Khenti  Amenti  as  "  Osiris,"  and 
declares  that  all  spirits,  both  the  good  and  the  bad,  hold  him 
in  awe.  Afu  Ra  does  not  address  Osiris,  and  apparently  he 
takes  no  notice  of  the  gods  who  praise  him,  but  he  calls 
upon  Horus  to  avenge  him  on  those  who  conspire  against 
him,  and  to  cast  them  to  the  "  Master  of  the  Lords  of  the 
furnaces  "  that  he  may  have  them  destroyed.  The  furnaces, 
or  fire-pits,  are  four  in  number,  and  into  these  the  enemies 
of  Afu  Ra  are  hurled  and  destroyed.  Who  these  enemies 
are  is  not  clear,  but  that  they  have  incurred  the  displeasure 
of  Afu  Ra  is  certain. 

The    Fifth    Section    of   the    Tuat    is  called  "  Arit " 

^  ,  and  Afu  Ra  is    admitted    through    its    gate 


154  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

by  a  Serpent-god  called  "  Teka-her  "  j^j  y  or  "  Fiery- 
face."  The  god  is  towed  as  before,  and  he  first  meets 
the  nine  gods  Kheru-Ennutchi,  and  a  group  of  gods 
who  represent  the  "souls  of  men  who  dwell  in  the 
Tuat,"  and  who  are  under  the  control  of  the  god 
Heriqenbetef  Afu  Ra  next  meets  a  company  of  gods  who 
represent  the  souls  of  those  "  who  were  speakers  of  the 
truth  upon  earth,  and  who  magnified  Ra."  As  a 
reward  they  are  given  habitations  of  peace  with  Ra, 
praises  are  sung  to  their  souls,  they  shall  eat  meat  in 
the  Field  of  Reeds  (Sekhet  Aaru),  and  offerings  shall  be 
made  to  them  always  upon  earth,  even  as  to  Hetep, 
the  Lord  of  the  Field  of  Offerings  (Sekhet  Hetepet). 
From  these  statements  it  is  clear  that  the  souls  of  those 
who  had  led  a  life  of  truth  and  integrity  upon  earth 
enjoyed  existence  with  the  gods  in  the  Field  of  Offerings, 
in  a  place  specially  set  apart  for  the  spirits  and  souls  of 
the  righteous.  The  importance  of  offerings  is  once  again 
insisted  on,  and  it  is  certain  that  the  religion  of  the 
Egyptians  was,  in  the  main,  one  of  sacrifices»and  offerings. 
To  the  right  of  Afu  Ra  are  the  twelve  "gods  who 
sing  praises  in  the  Tuat,"  and  the  twelve  "gods  who 
hold  the  measuring  cord,"  and  the  four  Henbiu  gods 
who  are  the  overseers  of  the  celestial  domains.  The 
first  of  these  groups  of  gods  enjoy  their  position  in  the 
Tuat  because  they  praised  Ra  morning  and  evening, 
and  because  they  "satisfied"  him;  and  they  partake  of 
the  food  of  the  god.  The  gods  with  the  measuring 
tape  measure  out  the  allotments  for  the  blessed,  and  no 
soul  takes  possession  of  his  allotment  unless  he  has  proved 
himself  to  have  been  a  speaker  of  the  truth  upon  earth. 
The  ground  which  is  cultivated  by  the  blessed  is  kept 
in  a  fertile  state  by  the  Henbiu  gods,  who  from  time  to 
time  dress  it  with  "sand."  To  the  left  of  the  god  are 
seen  representatives  of  the  four  great  nations  of  men 
into  which  the  Egyptians  divided  mankind,  namely  Men 
{i.e.,  Egyptians),  Negroes,  Libyans,  and  Asiatics ;  the 
Egyptians  and  the  Libyans  are  said  to  have  sprung  from 
the  eye  of  Ra.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  the  members  of 
each  nation  or  people  live  together  in  the  Tuat.  Near 
these  are  the  gods  who  administer  the   Kingdom  of  Osiris 


The  Abode  of  the  Blessed  155 

of  Abydos.  First  come  the  "holders  of  time  in  Amenti," 
who  hold  in  their  hand  the  serpent  Meteriu,  and  it  is  their 
duty  to  measure  the  period  of  the  life  of  souls  in  that 
region,  and  to  act  as  timekeepers  generally  for  those  who 
have  to  perform  work  for  Osiris.  Next  come  the 
Tchatchau,  i.e.,  "  chiefs,"  or  taskmasters,  who  have  the 
lists  of  the  men  in  the  celestial  corvee,  and  keep  a  record 
of  the  work  which  they  do.  They  are  impartial  overseers, 
and  they  see  that  the  commands  of  Osiris  are  carried  out 
to  the  letter,  and  that  no  soul  is  made  to  do  more  than  his 
share  of  the  work  of  the  T^at.  As  men  were  rewarded  or 
punished  in  the  Tuat  according  to  their  deeds  upon  earth, 
and  as  these  timekeepers  and  taskmasters  rewarded  or 
punished  souls  according  to  the  entries  in  their  registers, 
they  may  be  regarded  as  the  recording  angels  of  the 
Kingdom  of  Osiris.  The  man  who  was  a  field-labourer  in 
this  world  could  hardly  expect  to  be  anything  else  in  the 
next,  but  at  least  he  would  work  there  for  a  just  and 
impartial  Judge. 

The  Sixth  Section  of  the  Tuat  is  guarded  by  a  gate 
called  Nebtaha,  and  its  warder  is  the  Serpent-god  Setem- 
ARiTF,  i.e.,  "  Fire  in  his  eye."  In  or  near  this  gate  was 
situated  the  Judgment  Hall  of  Osiris,  and  we  see  Osiris  in 
it  seated  upon  a  chair  of  state  placed  upon  the  top  of 
a  platform  with  steps.     The  god,  who  is  here  called  Sar, 

,  is  in  mummy  form,  and  wears  the  double  crown,  ^, 

and  holds  •¥-  and  j  in  his  hands.    Before  him  is  a  Balance,  the 

pillar  of  which  is  in  the  form  of  a  human  mummy.  On  each 
of  the  nine  steps  of  the  throne  stands  a  god.  Above  these 
is  a  boat  in  which  an  ape  is  standing  beating  a  pig  called 
the  "  Eater  of  the  Arm."  In  front  of  the  boat  is  another 
ape,  and  above,  in  the  corner,  stands  Anubis.  This  version 
of  the  Judgment  Scene  is  quite  different  from  that  found  in 
the  papyri,  as  a  glance  at  the  Papyrus  of  Ani  (Plates  III 
and  IV)  will  show.  The  boat  of  Afu  Ra  is  towed  through 
this  Section  as  before,  and  the  god  passes  a  series  of  jackal- 
headed  sceptres  to  each  of  which  two  of  the  enemies  of 
Osiris  are  tied.  Afu  Ra,  as  he  moves  on,  has  on  his  right 
twelve  Maatiu  gods,  and  twelve  Heteptiu  gods,  who 
represent  the  souls  of  those  "  whose  Kau,  or  Doubles,  have 
"  been  washed  clean,  whose  iniquities  have  been  done  away, 


156  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

"  and  who  were  declared  speakers  of  the  truth  at  the 
"  Judgment."  Twelve  other  gods  are  engaged  in  the  culti- 
vation   of  wheat,   which    is    here    called    the    "body   and 

members  of  Sar,"  |  1  ^,  and  the  beings  who  ate 

this  wheat  ate  the  body  of  their  god.^  Wheat  was  the  "plant 
of  truth,"  and  Osiris  was  Truth,  and  the  eaters  of  the  divine 
wheat  became  truth,  even  as  he  was. 

The   Seventh    Section   of  the    Tuat    is    guarded    by 
a  gate  which   is   called   "  Pestit,"    and    its    warder    is    the 

serpent-god    Akhanarit     «>-=>         .      Here    are    found    a 

number  of  gods  whose  arms  and  hands  arc  hidden,  and  who 
represent  "  invisible  beings  whom  the  dead  are  able  to  see." 
These  must  be  followers  of  Ra,  for  Afu  Ra  promises  them 
that  they  shall  be  with  him  in  Het-Benben,  i.e.,  the  House 
of  the  Benben  Stone  in  Anu  (Heliopolis),  wherein  the  spirit 
of  the  Sun-god  was  supposed  to  dwell  on  certain  occasions. 
Next  come  gods  armed  with  clubs  having  forked  ends  ; 
these  are  the  Kheru-Metauh,  whose  duty  it  was  to  maim 
and  destroy  the  serpent  Seba.  This  monster  is  seen  near 
them,  and  from  out  of  his  body  twelve  human  heads  emerge 
when  Afu  Ra  appears.  Beyond  is  a  group  of  Star-gods, 
who  hold  the  rope  which  fetters  Qan,  or  Aqen,  or  Naq, 
a  god  whose  functions  are  not  known  exactly.  Close  by, 
on  the  back  of  the  serpent  Nehep,  lie  twelve  mummies,  who 
represent  "  those  who  are  asleep  in  the  body  of  Osiris  "  ; 
these  are  in  the  hands  of  Tuati,  the  god  of  the  Tuat.  As 
Afu  Ra  passes  these,  Tuati  addresses  the  mummies  and 
bids  them  cast  aside  their  bandages,  and  throw  off  their 
wigs,  and  collect  their  bones  and  flesh,  and  open  their 
eyes,  and  rise  up  from  their  state  of  inertness,  and  take 
possession  of  their  estates  in  Sekhet  Nebt  Hetepet. 
Further  on  is  a  pool  of  boiling  water,  or  a  lake  of  fire,  and 
the  heat  which  arises  from  the  serpent  in  it  is  so  fierce  that 
the  gods  and  souls  of  the  earth  dare  not  approach  the  pool. 
The  duty  of  the  gods  who  sit  round  about  it  is  to  provide 
warmth  for  the  Governor  of  Aukert,  i.e.,  for  the  Governor 
of  the  Tuat  of  Heliopolis.     After  a  time  these  gods  receive 

^   Prof.  Wiedemann  has  collected  a  number  of  important  facts  on  this 
subject  in  his  valuable  paper  "Osiris  V<cg#-tant." 


The  Abode  of  the  Blessed  157 

their  bodies  and  souls  from  the  serpent  Nehep,  and  then 
they  proceed  to  the  Field  of  Reeds. 

When  Afu  Ra  enters  the  Eighth  Section  of  the  Tuat, 

which  is  guarded  by  a  gate  called  Bekhkhi,  jL^  fllj  ll  f=~^' 
the  warder  of  which  is  the  Serpent-god   Sether,     1  c.  ( II  y , 

or  "  Fiery  Face,"  he  passes  into  the  western  part  of  the 
Tuat  of  Anu,  or  Heliopolis.  His  boat  is  towed  into  a  very 
long  lake,  or  a  series  of  lakes,  or  lagoons,  which  must 
represent  the  lakes  in  the  Delta,  or  a  part  of  the  Mediter- 
ranean Sea ;  the  god  who  is  in  charge  of  these  waters 
is  Nu.  In  the  water  itself  we  see  four  groups  of  men 
performing  evolutions  in  the  waters.  These  are  addressed 
by  the  gods  who  are  towing  Afu  Ra,  and  are  ordered  by 
them  to  "praise  the  soul  of  Ra  which  is  in  heaven,  and  his 
body  which  is  on  the  earth."  Next  the  god  of  the  waters, 
Nu,  calls  upon  the  men  in  the  waters  to  worship  Ra,  and 
promises  them  that  they  shall  breathe  air  through  their 
nostrils,  and  enjoy  peace  in  their  waters.  Offerings  shall 
be  made  on  earth  to  their  souls,  which  shall  never  die,  and 
they  shall  be  fed  like  Ra,  whose  body  is  on  earth,  and  whose 
soul  is  in  heaven.  The  men  in  the  water  must  assuredly 
represent  those  who  have  been  drowned  in  the  Nile,  or  in 
the  Lakes  of  the  Delta,  or  in  the  sea.  Apparently  the 
Egyptian  theologians  did  not  know  how  to  arrange  for  the 
bodies  of  those  who  were  drowned  being  rejoined  by  their 
souls,  so  they  decided  that  they  must  be  content  to  remain 
separated  from  their  souls,  even  as  Ra  is  separated  from 
his  soul.  Further  on  are  the  Tchatchau,  or  chiefs,  or 
"  taskmasters,"  who  have  been  already  mentioned,  and  a 
group  of  souls,  each  of  whom  stands  with  a  loaf  of  bread 
and  some  seke7nu  vegetables  before  it.  These  souls  repre- 
sent the  great  company  of  those  who  have  been  permitted 
to  take  up  their  abode  by  the  Lake  of  Fire  called  Serser, 
in  the  very  centre  of  which  stood  the  throne  of  Osiris,  and 
who  are  fed  daily  by  the  order  of  Osiris.  They  receive 
a  fixed  daily  ration,  the  quantity  of  which  never  varies,  in 
fact  their  "  daily  bread."  This  ration  was  given  by  the 
Tchatchau,  or  by  gods  under  their  direction,  and  every  soul 
received  its  portion  without  any  addition  or  diminution.  In 
passing  through  the  T^at,   Afu  Ra  confirms  this  ration  to 


158  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

the  souls  who  are  the  faithful  servants  of  Osiris.  Further 
on  is  a  company  of  the  enemies  of  Osiris,  who  stand  with 
their  arms  tied  together  at  the  elbows  behind  their  backs  in 
a  most  painful  attitude.  Before  these,  and  facing  them,  is 
the  monster  serpent  Khati,  which  belches  fire  on  them, 
whilst  the  seven  gods  who  stand  on  his  back  aid  the  work 
of  their  destruction.  The  offences  with  which  they  are 
charged  is  contempt  of  secret  things  {i.e.,  the  mysteries), 
insult  offered  to  the  sacred  object  called  seke?)i,  and  the 
profanation  of  the  mysteries  of  the  Tuat,  and  the  punish- 
ment which  Horusthe  Aged  inflicts  upon  them  is  mutilation 
and  burninof  of  their  bodies,  and  annihilation  of  their  souls. 
The  Ninth  Section  of  the  Tuat  is  guarded  by  the 
gate  called   "  Aat-shefsheft,"   the   warder   of  which   is   the 

Serpent-god  Abta  N,^         .     The  pictures  which  illustrate 

this  Section  represent  the  performance  of  the  ceremonies 
that  were  carried  out  in  it  with  the  view  of  making  Afu 
Ra  to  finish  his  journey  in  the  Tuat  successfully.  The  boat 
of  the  god  is  towed  as  before  by  four  gods,  but  the  way  of 
the  god  is  blocked  by  the  serpent  Aapep  and  the  crocodile 
Seshsesh,  or  Sessi.  To  destroy  them  seems  to  be  impossible, 
but  they  may  be  rendered  impotent  by  means  of  spells  cast 
on  them  by  Afu  Ra.  Against  them  go  forth  gods  posses- 
sing words  of  power,  and  the  Saiu  Ape-gods,  and  the  Sait 
goddesses  :  the  second  and  the  third  of  these  groups  work 
magic  against  the  monsters  by  tying  knots  in  ropes,  and 
muttering  spells  over  them  as  they  work.  Having  taken 
up  their  positions  all  these  shake  out  the  nets  which  they 
hold  in  their  hands,  and  recite  their  incantations,  and  Aapep 
and  Sessi  are  rendered  powerless.  Between  the  monsters 
and  the  groups  of  gods  already  described  is  the  prostrate 
figure  of  a  god  called  Aai,  who  is  grasping  with  both  hands 
the  end  of  a  rope,  which  is  held  by  three  men  armed  with 
harpoons.  Aai  has  on  his  head  a  small  disk,  and  two 
objects  which  resemble  the  ears  of  an  ass.  He  may  be 
a  form  of  the  Sun-god,  for  the  ass  is  one  of  the  types  of 
the  god,  or  he  may  represent  a  victim  which  had  been 
placed  there  to  tempt  the  crocodile  from  his  place.  Next 
Afu  Ra  approaches  the  serpent  Khepri,  who  has  a  head 
and  a  pair  of  human  legs  at  each  end  of  his  body,  and  under 
him  passes  a  rope  which  is  hauled  by  the  Eight  Powers  on 


The  Abode  of  the  Blessed  159 

the  one  side,  and  by  the  Souls  of  Amenti,  and  the  Followers 
of  Thoth,  Horus,  and  Ra  on  the  other.  The  other  gods 
in  this  Section,  namely  Horus  in  his  boat,  the  two-headed 
god  Horus- Set,  i.e.y  Day  and  Night,  the  gods  who  raise 
the  Crowns  of  the  South  and  the  North,  are  all  engaged  in 
performing  ceremonies  connected  with  the  reconstitution  of 
Afu  Ra  as  the  Day-Sun  of  this  world.  At  the  end  of  the 
section  are  :  i.  The  serpent  Shemti,  with  four  heads  at 
each  end  of  his  body.  2.  The  serpent  Bata,  with  a  head 
at  each  end  of  his  body.  3.  The  serpent  Tepi,  with  four 
human  heads  and  bodies  at  each  end  of  his  body.  4.  Tepi's 
warder,  Abeth.  Against  all  these  go  forth  two  gods,  each 
armed  with  a  net. 

In  the  Tenth  Section  of  the  Tuat,  which  is  guarded 
by    the   gate    "  Tcheserit,"    the    warder    of    which    is    the 

Serpent-god  Sethu    I         ,  Afu  Ra  is  towed  by  four  gods 

as  before.  All  opposition  to  his  progress  has  been  over- 
come, and  the  gods  of  this  Section  have  nothing  to  do 
except  to  assist  in  the  further  reconstitution  of  the  god. 
Unti,  with  two  stars,  lights  up  the  Tuat,  four  fire-gods 
supply  light  and  fire,  three  star-gods  bring  the  face  of  the 
disk  of  the  sun  of  this  earth,  Semi  acts  as  guide,  Besi  supplies 
the  materials  for  the  sun's  fires,  Ankhi  determines  the 
duration  of  the  day,  four  goddesses  address  words  of 
welcome  to  the  god,  and  Mehen,  bearing  the  double  bow  of 
Horus-Set,  leads  Afu  Ra  towards  the  east.  On  his  right 
are  the  imperishable  stars,  and  the  goddesses  who  tow  the 
boat  of  Afu  Ra  at  dawn,  and  the  Eye  of  Ra,  which  takes 
its  place  in  the  face  already  mentioned,  and  several  other 
gods  of  the  Tuat.  On  his  left  lies  the  serpent  Aapep,  and 
about  his  neck  is  a  chain  which  is  grasped  by  the  Setfiu 
gods,  and  the  Tchatiu  gods,  and  the  colossal  hand  of 
Amen-khat.  Attached  to  the  chain  are  the  five  small 
chains  of  Keb  and  the  Four  Sons  of  Horus,  and  by 
another  chain  lies  the  goddess  Serq.  The  Antiu  gods  and 
the  Henatiu  gods_ armed  with  knives  and  sticks  with  curled 
ends  also  attack  Aapep,  and,  as  the  monster  is  now  utterly 
subdued,  Afu  Ra  continues  his  course  without  further 
hindrance  from  him. 

The   Eleventh    Section   of  the   Tuat   is  guarded   by 

a  gate  called   "  Shetatbesu  "  g;      J   I         ,  the  warder 


i6o  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 


I  I  I 


of   which    is    the   Serpent-god  Amnetuf  [j-|k        / 

Once  more  Aapep  appears,  but  he  is  in  fetters,  and  the 
gods  of  the  Section  stand  ready  to  attack  him  with  knives 
if  necessary.  Next  come  four  Ape-gods,  each  holding  a 
large  hand,  and  their  duty  is  to  stand  near  the  Sun-god, 
two  on  this  side  and  two  on  that,  and  hold  up  the  disk  in 
the  sky,  and  sing  hymns  to  it.  The  gods  who  stand  on 
the  right  of  Afu  Ra  place  crowns  on  the  head  of  the  Sun- 
god,  and  give  names  to  all  his  forms,  and  drive  away  Set, 
and  sing  hymns  to  the  new  Sun-god.  Those  on  the  left 
carry  disks  for  him,  and  open  the  Gate  of  Akert  to  him,  and 
bear  stars,  and,  like  the  "morning  stars  "  in  Job  xxxviii,  7, 
sing  hymns  to  him  when  he  is  received  into  the  arms  of 
the  Sky-god  Nu. 

The  Twelfth  Section  of  the   Tuat  is  guarded  by  a 

gate  called  "  Tesert-baiu  "  —„—  a,<^^^  the  warders  of  which 

are  the  Serpent-gods  Sebi  ^uu  and   Reri  (In.     This 

gate  is  different  from  all  the  rest,  for  no  companies  of  gods 
guard  it,  and,  though  flames  of  fire  sweep  round  about  it  to 
keep  away  enemies,  its  chief  protectors  are  the  Serpent- 
gods  and  the  standards  of  Khepera  and  Temu.  Just 
before  Afu  Ra  reaches  this  part  of  the  Tuat  he  transforms 
himself  into  the  Beetle  of  Khepera,  which  has  the  solar 
disk  in  front  of  it,  and  so  emerges  from  the  eastern  end  of 
the  Tuat  into  the  vestibule  which  is  the  immediate  entrance 
to  the  sky  of  this  world.  When  the  ball  of  the  sun  comes 
to  the  celestial  ocean  it  is  placed  by  the  gods  of  the  dawn 
in  the  Mantchet  Boat,  and  it  begins  its  journey  across  the 
sky.  Thus  Afu  Ra  has  completed  his  journey  through  the 
Tuat,  has  triumphed  over  all  dangers  therein,  has  passed 
judgment  on  his  enemies,  and  bestowed  rewards  on  his 
friends,  and  as  Ra  in  the  eastern  sky  he  begins  to  dispense 
heat,  and  liy'ht,  and  life  to  the  inhabitants  of  this  world. 
All  the  souls  who  have  accompanied  him  in  his  boat  live 
again,  and  they  look  down  from  it  upon  their  old  homes 
and  friends.  They  live  with  Ra,  eat  of  his  food,  are 
arrayed  in  apparel  like  his,  and  partake  of  his  nature. 

For  the  beings  in  the  Tuat  who  were  not  provided 
for  by  Osiris,  existence  must  have  been  very  sad,  for 
they   were   obliged   to  live  in  darkness  and  misery,  except 


The  Gods  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead         i6i 

for  the  brief  space  of  time  each  night  when  Afu  Ra 
passed  through  the  Tuat.  In  fact,  the  Tuat  was  a  place 
of  darkness,  hunger,  thirst,  and  suffering  for  many  souls. 
The  Egyptians  did  not  believe  in  purgatory  or  everlasting 
punishment;  the  souls  in  the  Tuat  lived  just  so  long  as  their 
friends  and  relatives  on  earth  made  the  prescribed  funerary 
offerings  in  their  tombs  upon  earth,  and  no  longer,  then 
they  died  the  "second  death."  The  enemies  of  Ra  and 
Osiris,  that  is  to  say,  the  wicked,  were  slaughtered  daily 
and  their  bodies  consumed  by  fire,  but  each  day  brought 
its  own  supply  of  these,  and  thus  the  avenging  gods 
were  kept  busy  daily,  and  the  fire-pits  were  filled  with 
victims  daily.  There  is  no  evidence  in  the  texts  that  the 
Egyptians  thought  that  the  burning  of  the  same  victims 
could  go  on  for  ever. 


THE  GODS  OF  THE  BOOK  OF  THE 

DEAD 

Tern  ^^,  or  Atmu  (]^^^|  i^,   according 

to  Egyptian  tradition,  the  oldest  of  the  gods,  and  he  is 
called  the  "divine  god,"  the  "self-created,"  the  "maker 
of  the  gods,"  the  "creator  of  men,"  "who  stretched  out 
the  heavens,"  "  who  illumineth  the  Tuat  with  his 
Eyes"     [i.e.,     the    sun    and    moon).      He    existed    when 

D   tQ       ^  L i  D   P^       ci  IS.  D   W      O  III 

not  was  sky,    not  was  earth,    not  were         men, 

JS?^  Ill  III  D  (i^     ^      _M^ 

not      were     born  the  gods,  not  was         death.^ 

In  what  form  he  existed  is  not  stated,  but  he  created 
for  himself,  as  a  place  wherein  to  dwell,  the  great  mass 
of  Celestial  Waters  to  which  the  Egyptians  gave  the  name 

of   Nu    3^.        In    these,   for  a  time,   he   lived  quite 

alone,  and  then,  in  a  series  of  efforts  of  thought,  he  created 

^  Pyramid  Text  of  Pepi  I,  1.  664. 
VOL.    I.  M 


i62  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

the  heavens  and  the  celestial  bodies  in  them,  and  the  gods, 
and  the  earth,  and  men  and  women,  animals,  birds,  and 
creeping  things,  in  his  own  mind.  These  thoughts  or 
ideas  of  creation  were  translated  into  words  by  Thoth, 
or  the  intelligence  or  mind  of  Temu,  and  when  he 
uttered  these  words  all  creation  came  into  beinir.  The 
great  College  of  the  Priests  of  Anu,  or  Heliopolis,  made 
Temu  the  head  of  their  Companyof  the  Gods,  and  so  far  back 
as  the  IVth  dynasty  they  made  Ra,  the  god  of  the  sun,  to 
usurp  his  place,  and  his  powers,  and  his  attributes.  In 
their  system  of  theology,  so  far  as  it  can  be  learned  from 
the  Pyramid  Texts,  Temu  was  made  to  be  a  form  of  the 
Sun-god  in  the  evening  or  early  night,  and  in  this 
character  he  generally  appears  in  the  later  Recensions  of 
the  Book  of  the  Dead.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that 
Temu  is  always  depicted  in  the  form  of  a  man  or  king, 
and  he  wears  the  Crowns  of  the  South  and  the  North  ; 
like  all  other  gods  he  carries    in    his    hands    the    sceptre 

1   and  the  symbol  of  "life"  -?■.      Many  of  the  attributes 

of  Temu  were  absorbed  by  the  god  Khepera,  who  was 
also  a  great  Creation-god  and  a  form  of  the  Sun-god.  In 
late  times,  the  Egyptians  formulated  the  existence  of  a 
female    counterpart    of    Temu    called    Temt    or    Temit 

^^^  T^  .     In    an    interesting  passage   in   Chapter  CLIV 

of  the  Theban  Recension,  the  name  of  Temu  is  coupled 
with  that  of  Osiris  as  beino-  ofods  whose  flesh  never 
saw  corruption.  On  the  part  played  by  Tem  in  the 
creation  of  the  great  eternal  Soul-spirit,  or  the  Light-spirit, 
which  is  the  source  from  which  all  the  Spirit-souls  of  men 
are  descended,  see  Chapter  LXXVIII. 

Nu,   '^^^^  Jj,  IS  the  name  given  to  the  vast  mass  ot 


water  which  existed  in  primeval  times,  and  was  situated 
presumably  in  the  sky  ;  it  formed  the  material  part  of  the 
great  god  Tem,  or  Atmu,  who  was  the  creator  of  the 
universe  and  of  gods  and  men.  In  this  mass,  which  was 
believed  to  be  of  fathomless  depth  and  of  boundless  extent, 
were  the  germs  of  all  life,  and  of  all  kinds  of  life,  and  for  this 
reason  the  god  who  was  the  personification  of  the  water,  i.e., 


Nu,  was  called  the  "Father  of  the  Gods,"  (]    ^    ^IHj^ 


The  Gods  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead         163 
and  the  "producer  of  the  Great  Company  of  the  Gods," 

i 


O     I    I    I 


The    watery    mass    of   Nu    was    the 

prototype  of  the  great  World-Ocean  which  later  ancient 
nations  believed  to  surround  the  whole  world.  Out  from 
Nu  came  the  river  which  flowed  through  the  Tuat,  or 
Other  World,  and  divided  its  valley  into  two  parts,  making 
it  to  resemble  Egypt.  From  Nu  also  came  the  waters 
which  appeared  in  the  two  famous  caverns  in  the  First 
Cataract,  and  which,  flowino-  from  their  mouths,  formed  the 
river  Nile.  The  waters  of  Nu  formed  the  dwelling  place  of 
Tem,  and  out  of  them  came  the  sun,  which  was  the  result 
of  one  of  Tern's  earliest  acts  of  creation.  The  early 
inhabitants  of  Egypt  thought  that  the  sun  sailed  over  the 
waters  of  Nu  in  two  magical  boats,  called  Mantchet,  or 
Matet,  or  Atet,  and  Semktet,  or  Sektet,  respectively  ;  in 
the  former  the  sun  set  out  in  the  morning  on  his  journey, 
which  he  finished  in  the  latter.  A  very  ancient  tradition  in 
Egypt  asserted  that  Nu  was  the  head  of  a  divine  company, 
which  consisted  of  four  o-ods  and  four  croddesses.     These 

o  o 

were  : — 

Nu,  ^^^  rjf .  Nut,  , ,  ^^^^  ^  Jl  • 

Hehu,||^J.  HehutJI^;^. 

Kekui,  ^  ^^  ^  s^  •  Kekuit,  ^  \\  ^  ^  ^  | . 

Kerb,  ^|^|.  Kerhet,  ^fj^  I' 

The  gods  of  these  pairs  were  depicted  in  human  form, 
with  the  heads  of  frogs,  and  the  goddesses  in  the  forms  of 
women,  with  serpents'  heads.  Nu  was  the  primeval  water 
itself,  Hehu  personified  its  vast  and  endless  extent,  Kekui  the 
darkness  which  brooded  over  the  water,  and  Kerh  its  inert 
and  motionless  character.  Very  little  is  known  about  the 
three  last-named  gods  and  their  female  counterparts,  for 
they  belong  to  a  system  of  cosmogony  which  was  superseded 
by  other  systems  in  which  the  Sun-god  Ra  played  the  most 
prominent  part.  The  goddess  Nut,  who  was  in  the  earliest 
times  a  Water-goddess,  was  depicted  under  the  New  Empire 
in  the  form  of  a  woman,  and  also  in  the  form  of  a  cow. 

M    2 


164  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 


Ra,  - a  Jj ,  is  the  name  which  was  given  to  the  Sun- 
god  by  the  early  Egyptians,  but  the  meaning  of  the  word 
and  its  origin  are  unknown.  Ra,  according  to  dynastic 
tradition,  was  the  first  being  created  by  Tem  out  of  the 
Celestial  Waters  of  Nu,  and  he  was  regarded  as  the  visible 
emblem  of  God,  and  as  the  great  god  of  this  world,  and  to 
him  sacrifices  and  offerings  were  made  daily.  The  seat  of 
Ra-worship  was,  under  the  Ancient  Empire,  situated  at 
Anu,  or  Heliopolis,  a  large  city  which  lay  a  few  miles  to  the 
east  of  the  site  occupied  by  modern  Cairo.  This  city  was, 
from  the  earliest  times,  the  terminus  of  the  great  caravan 
road  between  Syria  and  Egypt,  and  was  densely  populated 
with  inhabitants  of  many  nationalities.  Several  kinds  of  gods 
must  have  been  worshipped  there,  among  them  being  many 
who  were  favourites  of  the  caravan  men  and  merchants 
who  came  from  Asia,  but  the  greatest  of  them  all  was  Ra. 
These  facts  show  that  the  bulk  of  the  people  who  flocked  to 
Anu  were  worshippers  of  Ra,  for  the  temple  of  the  Sun- 
god  was  maintained  by  the  offerings  of  the  faithful,  and  the 
importance  of  the  temple  proves  that  the  devotees  of  the 
Sun-god  were  very  numerous  and  very  well-to-do.  The 
worship  of  the  sun  was  common  enough  at  all  periods 
among  the  tribes  of  Syria  and  the  Delta,  but  there  is  no 
evidence  to  show  that  it  was  as  common  among  the 
inhabitants  of  Upper  Egypt,  or  of  any  part  of  the  Upper  Nile 
Valley.  Among  the  bulk  of  Africans  the  moon  was,  and 
still  is,  the  favourite  object  of  worship,  and  not  the  sun. 
As  I  have  given  the  proofs  of  this  statement  in  my  Osiris 
and  the  Egyptian  Resurrection,  they  need  not  be  repeated 
here.  The  importance  of  Ra-worship  in  Lower  Egypt 
under  the  Ancient  Empire  was  due  entirely  to  the  political 
influence  of  the  priests,  which  was  used  very  skilfully.  The 
first  king  of  the  Vth  dynasty  was  Userkaf,  who  was  a  priest 
of  Ra,  and  it  seems  that  he  succeeded  in  wresting  the 
supreme  power  from  the  successors  of  the  great  kings 
Khufu,  Khafra,  and  Menkaura.  Whether  this  be  so  or  not 
matters  little,  but  it  is  almost  certain  that  he  was  the  first 

king  of  Egypt  who  added  the  title  "Son  of  Ra,"  ^kO. 
to  his  other  titles,  and  who  gave  himself  an  additional  name 
as  son  of  Ra.  The  priests  of  Ra  at  that  early  period  claimed 
to  have  in  their  bodies  the  veritable  blood  of  Ra,  and  they 


The  Gods  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead         165 

asserted  that  their  high  priests  were  the  offspring-  of  Ra  by- 
human  mothers.  And  of  the  existence  of  this  dogma  under 
the  Ancient  Empire  we  have  traditional  proof  in  the 
Westcar  Papyrus,  where  we  read  that  Userkaf  and  his  two 
immediate  successors,  Sahura  and  Kakaa,  were  the  sons  of 
the  god  Ra  by  Rut-tett,  the  wife  of  a  priest  of  the  god  Ra 

of  the  town  of  Sakhabu,  ^  ^-^  J  ^  ©  •     The  three  boys 

were  assisted  into  the  world  by  the  goddesses  Isis,  Nephthys, 
Meskhenet  and  Heqet,  and  by  the  god  Khnemu,  and  their 
future  greatness  was  prophesied  at  the  time  of  their  birth. 
The  belief  that  Ra  came  down  from  heaven  and  was  united 
to  a  mortal  woman,  and  that  every  king  of  Egypt  was 
the  offspring  of  such  a  union,  persisted  throughout  the 
country  for  about  three  thousand  years.  Hatshepsut 
decorated  the  walls  of  her  temple  at  Der  al-Bahari  with 
scenes  which  illustrate  the  principal  events  connected  with 
her  conception  and  birth,  and  prove  conclusively  that  she 
believed  herself  to  be  of  the  seed  of  Amen.  A  part  of  the 
temple  of  Amen-hetep  III  at  Luxor  was  decorated  with 
a  series  of  reliefs  which  prove  that  this  king  believed 
himself  to  be  Amen-Ra  incarnate,  and  there  is  no  doubt 
that  every  king  of  Egypt,  including  even  kings  of  Egypt  of 
Nubian  origin,  held  the  same  belief  Popular  tradition,  as 
represented  by  the  Pseudo  Callisthenes,  declared  that 
Alexander  the  Great  was  an  incarnation  of  Amen,  who  took 
the  form  of  the  last  native  king  of  Egypt,  Nekhtnebf,  and 
seduced  Olympias,  the  wife  of  Philip,  king  of  Macedon. 
And  the  story  of  the  journey  of  Alexander  the  Great  to  the 
temple  of  Amen  in  the  Oasis  of  Siwah,  in  order  to  be 
acknowledged  by  the  god  as  his  son  is  too  well  known  to 
need  mention.^ 

The  form  in  which  Ra  was  worshipped  in  the  large 
Sun-temples  which  were  built  by  some  of  the  kings  of 
the  Vth  dynasty  was  that  of  a  stone.  The  stone  had 
the  shape  of  a  massive,  truncated  obelisk,  with  a  pyramid 
above  it,  and  it  stood  on  a  strong  masonry  base.  The 
spirit  of  the  Sun-god  was  supposed  to  enter  the  stone 
at  certain  periods,  and  on  these  occasions  human  sacrifices 

^  A  statement  about  the  languages  into  which  this  story  has  been 
translated,  and  an  account  of  its  wanderings  will  be  found  in  my  Histoiy  of 
Alexander  the  Great,  Cambridge,  1890. 


i66  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

were  offered  to  it.  The  victims  were  probably  prisoners 
of  war  who  had  been  captured  alive,  and  foreigners, 
and  when  these  failed,  the  priests  must  have  drawn  upon 
the  native  population,  as  priests  have  done  in  Africa  from 
time  immemorial. 

Ra  sailed  over  the  sky  in  two  boats  ;  his  morning 
boat  was  called  "  Mantchet,"  or  Matet,  or  Atet,  and  his 
evening  boat  "  Semktet."  His  course  was  guided  by 
Madt,  the  personification  of  law,  order,  unfailing  regularity, 
etc.  After  he  set  in  the  west  in  the  evening  he  entered 
the  Tuat  under  a  different  form,  and  by  the  help  of  the 
gods  who  were  there,  and  by  the  power  which  he  possessed 
in  his  own  person,  he  passed  through  that  region 
successfully,  and  appeared  in  the  sky  of  this  world  the 
next  morning  in  his  usual  form.  As  he  passed  through  the 
Tuat  he  gave  air,  and  light,  and  food  to  those  who,  for 
some  reason  or  other  had  been  doomed  to  dwell  there. 
Two  fishes  swam  before  the  boat  of  Ra,  and  acted  as 
pilots  and  warned  him  of  coming  danger  ;  these  were  called 

Each  morning  as  he  was  about    to    enter    the    sky,    and 
just  before  he  left  the  Tuat,  he  engaged    in    battle    with 

the    great    Devil  called  "  Aapep  "  ViMili.   which,   aided 

by  a  group  of  powerful  monster  serpents,  attempted 
to  bar  his  progress,  and  make  his  reappearance  in  this 
world  impossible.  All  Aapep's  attacks  failed,  because  Ra 
first  cast  spells  on  him,  and  when  he  was  incapable  of 
motion,  the  supporters  of  the  Sun-god  bound  him  in  chains, 
then  hacked  him  to  pieces,  which  were  finally  consumed  by 
the  flames  of  Ra.  The  priests  of  Ra  told  this  story  of  their 
god,  but  it  is  far  older  than  the  period  when  Ra's  fame  was 
great,  and  the  two  great  protagonists  in  the  daily  fight 
between  Light  and  Darkness  were  Heru-ur  and  Set.  Under 
the  Vth  dynasty  the  priests  of  Ra  made  a  vigorous 
attempt  to  combat  the  spread  of  the  cult  of  the  Man-god 
Osiris,  which  had  spread  all  over  the  Delta  from  Busiris, 
the  northern  centre  of  the  cult,  and  all  over  Upper  Egypt 
from  Abydos,  the  southern  centre.  Before  the  end  of  the 
Vlth  dynasty  the  priests  of  Osiris  prevailed,  and  Ra  was 
relegated   to  an   inferior  position,   and   the  greatest  of  his 


The  Gods  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead         167 

attributes  were  ascribed  to  Osiris.  What  the  exact  cause 
of  the  contest  was  cannot  be  said,  but  it  is  quite  certain 
that  there  was  something  in  the  doctrines  of  the  priests 
of  Ra,  or  in  the  worship  that  was  the  practical 
expression  of  them,  which  was  contrary  to  the  instincts 
of  the  Egyptians  as  a  nation.  HeliopoHs  always  contained 
a  mixed  population,  and  it  is  probable  that  the  doctrines  of 
the  priests  of  Ra  were  tainted  with  Asiatic  beliefs 
which  were  an  abomination  to  the  indigenous  population 
of  Egypt.  There  was,  of  course,  a  very  important 
element  of  native  Egyptian  belief  associated  with  the  cult 
of  Ra,  and  that  explains  the  reception  of  sun-worship  in 
Upper  Egypt  during  the  Middle  and  New  Empires. 
Still,  we  see  that  from  the  Xllth  dynasty  onwards  the 
cult  of  Amen  was  predominant  in  Upper  Egypt,  and 
that  the  local  god  of  Thebes  absorbed  all  the  attributes 
of  Ra,  which  his  priests  had  transferred  to  him  from 
Tem,  Under  the  XlXth  and  XXth  dynasties  seventy- 
five  forms  of  Ra  were  distinguished,  and  the  Addresses 
to  these  formed  a  sort  of  Litany  of  Ra  which  was  said 
or  sung  during  the  services  in  the  temples,  and  copies 
of  them  were  painted  on  the  walls  of  the  tombs  of  several 
kings,  e.g.,  those  of  Seti  I,  Seti  II,  Rameses  IV.^ 

Khepra   S  <=>  (j  J)  >  W  (1  Jj ,    is   a   very   ancient 

god  whom  religious  tradition  associated  with  the  creation 
of  the  world  and  of  all  things  in  it.  He  is  usually  called 
Khepra  kheper  tchesef,  i.e.,   Khepra,  the  self-produced, 

O  <=z>  1  rjj  O  <=z>  ^i^  ,  and  his  principal  type  and  symbol 

was  a  beetle.  He  is  usually  represented  in  human  form 
with  a  beetle  upon  his  head,  but  sometimes  a  beetle  takes 
the  place  of  the  human  head.  In  the  Chapter  on  Egyptian 
Ideas  of  God,  we  have  already  described  the  part  which  he 
took  in  the  creation  of  the  world.  There  can  be  little  doubt 
that  the  cult  of  the  beetle  is  far  older  than  that  of  Ra  of 
HeliopoHs,  and  when  we  find  the  priests  of  Ra  identifying 
their  god  with  Khepera,  we  must  understand  that  it  is  only 
another  example  of  their  method  of  grafting  new  beliefs  on 
the  cult  of  the  old  indigenous  gods  of  their  country.  The 
cult  of  the  beetle  was  general  in  Egypt  and  the  Sudan,  and 

^  See  Naville,  La  Litanie  du  Soleil,  Leipzig,   1875. 


i68  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

many  of  the  ideas  which  the  inhabitants  of  the  Nile  Valley 
held  concerning  it  still  survive  in  those  countries.  The 
particular  beetle  which  the  Egyptians  chose  as  the  symbol 
of  their  god  Khepera  belongs  to  the  family  called  Scai-a- 
baeidac  (Coprophagi)  of  which  the  Scarabaeus  sacer  is 
the  type.  These  insects  form  a  very  numerous  group  of 
dung-feeding  Lamellicorns,  of  which,  however,  the  majority 
live  in  tropical  countries  ;  they  are  usually  black,  but  many 
are  adorned  with  bright  metallic  colours.  They  Hy  during 
the  hottest  part  of  the  day,  and  it  was  this  peculiarity  which 
probably  caused  the  primitive  Egyptians  to  associate  them 
with  the  sun.  Thus,  as  far  back  as  the  Vth  or  Vlth  dynasty, 
it  is  said  in  the  text  of  King  Unas  :  "  This  Unas  flieth  like 
"  a  goose  (or  duck),  he  alighteth  like  the  beetle  ;  he  flieth 
"  like  a  goose  (or  duck),  he  alighteth  like  the  beetle  upon 

"the  empty  throne   in  thy  Boat,  O  Ra,"     (1^  f^  ()  P]| 


\ 


o  (11.  476,  477). 


The  beetle  which  was  the  symbol  of  Khepera  was  the 
subject  of  many  curious  theories  among  ancient  classical 
writers.  Aelian,^  Porphyry-  and  Horapollo^  thought  that 
beetles  were  all  males,  and  that  as  there  were  no  females 
among  them  they  were  all  self-produced.  This  view  arose 
from  the  fact  that  to  the  ordinary  observer  the  male  and 
female  are  very  much  alike  and  because  the  male  and 
female  each  take  part  in  rolling  along  the  ball  which  is  so 
frequently  seen  with  them.  The  female  digs  a  hole  in  the 
ground  in  which  she  deposits  one  ^'g'^^.  Whilst  she  is  doing 
this  the  male  goes  about  and  collects  a  quantity  of  dung, 
which  he  rolls  over  and  over  again  until  it  becomes  a 
tolerably  compact  ball,  from  one  to  two  inches  in  diameter. 
This  he  rolls  along  to  the  hole  in  which  the  female  has 
deposited  her  ftg'g,  and,  sometimes  alone  and  sometimes 
helped  by  the  female,  he  pushes  the  ball  into  the  hole  on 

^  De  Nat.  Animalium,  X,  15, 
^  De  Al'stinentia,  IV,  9. 
^  Ed.  Leemans,  p.  11. 


The  Gods  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead         169 

top  of  the  Qgg,  where  it  remains  until  the  young  beetle  is 
hatched  out,  when  the  ball  serves  for  its  food.  It  was 
formerly  thought  that  the  ball  of  dung  contained  many 
eggs,  which  were  mixed  up  together  with  the  dung  on 
which  the  larvae  were  to  feed,  but  it  has  been  proved  by 
entomologists  that  the  female  of  the  Scarabaeus  sacer  only 
lays  one  ^'g'g  at  a  time.  This  fact  was  probably  known  to 
the  ancients,  for  Horapollo  says  that  the  scarab  denotes 
an  "  only-begotten,"  fxovoyeuTJ';.  Be  this  as  it  may,  the  ball 
of  the  sun,  which  was  the  immediate  cause  of  life  to  the 
world,   was    supposed  to  be    rolled    across    the    sky  by   a 

pfiorantic  beede,  Kheprer      m'^^^S.  who  was  at  a  very 

early  period  identified  with   Khepera,  the  Creator  and  the 

Father  of  the  gods     ^     \\\-      ^^^   Egyptians   believed 

that  the  beetle  was  an  incarnation  of  Khepera,  and  imagined 
some  resemblance  between  the  ball  of  food  for  the  larva 
which  it  rolled  over  the  ground  and  the  ball  of  the  sun, 
which  was  the  visible  expression  of  the  life  of  Khepera, 
and  was  rolled  across  the  sky  by  him.  They  thought  that 
if  they  made  figures  of  the  beetle  of  Khepera,  and  wore 
them,  they  would  attract  the  power  of  the  god  to  them,  and 
secure  his  protection  for  their  bodies,  both  when  living  and 
when  dead.  The  scarab  was  associated  with  burial  as  far 
back  as  the  IVth  dynasty,  according  to  one  tradition,  and 
another  tradition  shows  that  it  was  placed  on  the  bodies  of 
the  dead  as  an  amulet  under  the  1st  dynasty.  See  the  text 
of  Chapter  XXXb  and  the  translations  of  it  and  the  Rubrics 
to  Chapter  LXIV. 

Ptah  °|^,  or  Ptah,   Lord  of  Life,  °f ^^f^^' 

was  one  of  the  oldest  and  greatest  gods  of  Memphis,  and 
local  tradition  asserted  that  he  was  the  creator  of  the 
universe  ;  his  worship,  in  one  form  or  another,  goes  back 
to  the  beginning  of  the  Dynastic  Period.  He  was  identified 
with  Temu   and   Ra  and   was  called   "the  very  great  god 

who  existed  in  primeval  time,"     |  3  ^^^wna  ^^=*  TtTJ         ^  j^j; 

the  "father  of  fathers,"  ^  ^  ^  .^  f  ^'^•>  the  great- 
great-grandfather  of  the  gods ;  ' '  the  father  of  beginnings  (?), 
the  creator  of  the  egg  of  the  sun  and  moon,"  "  the  lord  of 


lyo  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

"  Maat,  the  kin^r  of  the  two  lands,  the  o"od  of  the  beautiful 
"  face,  who  created  his  own  image,  who  fashioned  his  own 
"  body,  the  Disk  of  heaven,  who  illumineth  Egypt  with  the 
"  fire  of  his  two  eyes,"  etc.  He  was  the  great  celestial 
worker  in  metals,  and  the  chief  smelter,  caster,  and  sculptor 
to  the  gods.  He  was  the  master  architect  of  the  world, 
and  he  made  the  design  for  every  part  of  the  framework  of 
the  world.  He  fashioned  the  bodies  of  men  in  this  world, 
and  also  the  new  bodies  into  which  souls  entered  in  the 
Tuat.  His  name  was  joined  to  that  of  several  gods  with 
whom  at  first  sight  it  seems  that  he  could  have  had  little 
in  common,  e.g.,  Ptah-Asar  (Ptah-Osiris),  Ptah-Hapi  (Ptah- 
Nile),  Ptah-Nu,  Ptah-Seker,  Ptah-Seker-Asar,  Ptah-Seker- 
Tem,  Ptah-Taten,  etc.,  which  shows  that  his  priests  made 
him  to  usurp  the  functions  and  attributes  of  many  older 
gods.  The  Theban  Recension  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead 
states  that  Ptah  performed  the  operation  of  "  Opening  the 
Mouth  "  on  the  gods,  with  a  metal  instrument  which  he 
had  made,  that  is  to  say,  he  raised  them  up  from  inertness 
and  gave  them  life  ;  and  every  follower  of  Osiris  believed 
that  Ptah  would  do  the  same  for  him.  Ptah  is  depicted  in 
the  form  of  a  bearded  man  with  a  bald  head  and  swathed  in 
mummy  bandages,  from  which  through  an  opening  in  front 
of  him   his   hands  project.       From  the   back  of  his  neck 

hangs  the  mendt  (w  ,  a  symbol  of  physical  well-being  and 
sexual  intercourse,  and  he  holds  in  his  hands  the  emblems 
of  "  content  "  I,  "life  "  -r-,  and   "stability  "  u.      He  stands 

upon  the  symbol  of  maat  / — i.  Ptah  was  the  chief  member 
of  the  great  triad  of  Memphis,  his  female  counterpart  and 
son  being  called  Sekhmet  and  Nefer-Tem,  i.e.,  Young 
Tem,  respectively. 

Ptah-Nu,  °y  ^1  and  Ptah-Hap  °y  f"^ 


have   no  special   representations  in   the   reliefs,   for 

they  are  merely  forms  of  the  Celestial  Waters  and  the  Nile. 

Ptah-Seker   °|^^*jj  represents  the  union  of  Ptah 

with  Seker,  the  oldest  and  greatest  god  of  that  portion  of 
the  Tuat  which  was  set  apart  for  the  inhabitants  of  the 
nome  of  Memphis.     Seker  was  originally  a  personification 


The  Gods  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead         171 

of  inert  matter,  motionless  and  dead,  and  he  sat  enthroned 
in  a  region  of  utter  blackness  and  night  ;  in  later  times  he 
became  the  Death-god  of  Memphis.  He  is  depicted,  like 
Ptah,  in  the  form  of  a  mummy,  but  he  sometimes  has  a 
hawk's  head  ;  he  holds  the  same  sceptres,  etc.,  and  he  is 
called  "  the  greatest  god  who  was  in  the  beginning,   and 

dwelleth  in  the  darkness  "  1 J  ^  <c^ T -^^^  "^  ^^-^  T  S  ^^f^"  • 

In  the  XVI  Ith  Chapter  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead  the 
deceased  prays  to  be  delivered  from  "  the  great  god 
"  who  carrieth  away  the  soul,  and  eateth  hearts,  and 
"  feedeth  upon  filth,  the  guardian  of  the  darkness,  the 
"  dweller  in  the  Seker  Boat."  In  reply  to  the  question 
"  Who  is  this  .-^ "  the  answer  is  given,  "  It  is  Suti  (or  Seti), 
or  Smamur,  the  Soul  of  Keb."  This  makes  it  quite  certain 
that    Seker  was    Darkness    and    Death   personified.     The 

Seker  Boat,  ^^==^  >^'-^%^  ^  which  is  seen  in  the  Vignettes  of 

Chapter  LXXIV  (see  Plate  XVIII),  contained  a  coffer  in 
which  was  placed  the  emblem  of  Seker,  On  the  day  of  the 
festival  this  boat,  which  rested  on  a  sledge  with  runners, 
was  drawn  round  the  sanctuary  at  sunrise  by  the  priests  of 
the  god.  This  ceremony  was  performed  under  the  direction 
of  the  high  priest,   whose  official  title  was   Ur-kherp-hem 

•'^sf  <j  T ,  i.e.,  the  "great  chief  of  the  hammer,"  a  fitting  title 

for  the  high-priest  of  the  Blacksmith-god  Ptah.     The  name 

given  to  the  boat  itself  was   Henu   x    \I       ^A/»  ^^^^d  it  is 

A  /www   v£   ^1  I  I  I  . 

represented  on  objects  which  date  from  the  1st  dynasty. 


n 


Ptah-Seker-Asar  R  3  ""^^^  jl  til  ^^  ^  triune  god,  to 
whom  belonged  all  the  attributes  of  Seker,  the  god  of  death, 
and  of  Osiris,  the  god  of  the  resurrection,  and  of  Ptah,  the 
Creator.  Originally,  as  Death-gods,  Seker  and  Osiris  had 
many  attributes  in  common,  and  the  fusion  of  the  two  gods 
was  the  result  of  the  triumph  of  Osiris  over  all  the  gods  of 
death  over  all  Egypt.  Seker  represented  death  absolute 
and  final,  but  Osiris  represented  the  death  which  was  merely 
a  temporary  phase  or  state  through  which  the  righteous  had 
to  pass  introductory  to  a  renewed  life  obtained  by  resurrec- 
tion, in  the  Kingdom  of  Osiris.  The  union  of  Ptah  with 
Seker  and  Osiris  symbolized  the  addition  of  creative  power 


172  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

to  death,  which  manifested  itself  in  providing  the  new  bodies 
in  which  the  souls  of  the  ricjhteous  were  to  live.  Ptah- 
Seker-Asar  has  to  all  intents  and  purposes  the  form  of 
Osiris,  but  Egyptian  artists  delighted  to  depict  him  as  a 
squat  pigmy,  with  a  large  bald  head  and  thick  limbs,  with  a 
beetle  on  the  top  of  his  head,  and  a  lock  of  hair  on  the  right 
side  of  it.  He  thus  possessed  all  the  virile  power  of  Menu, 
and  the  creative  power  of  Khepera,  and  the  youth  and 
vigour  of  Harpokrates.  The  union  of  Ptah  with  Seker  and 
Osiris  may  also  be  the  result  of  an  attempt  made  by  the 
priests  of  Memphis  to  make  those  gods  subordinate  to 
Ptah,  just  as  the  priests  of  Thebes  under  the  New  Empire 
tried  to  make  Osiris  subordinate  to  Amen. 

Ptah-Tatenn  °  ^J\  ';^  J\  is  depicted  in  the  form 
of  a  god  in  mummy  form  with  a  pair  of  horns,  and  a  disk, 
and  a  pair  of  plumes  on  his  head,  and  the  ordinary  symbols 
of  rule  /\  j  I    in  his  hands.     Tatenn  was  a  very  ancient 

god,  and  his  attributes  were  those  of  a  creative  god,  and 
resembled  those  ascribed  to  Ptah.  The  following  extract 
from  a  hymn,^  written  about  1200  B.C.,  illustrates  the  view 
of  the  Egyptians  about  this  god.  "  The  winds  come  forth 
"  from  thy  nostrils,  and  the  celestial  water  from  thy  mouth, 
"  and  the  staff  of  life  (i.e.,  wheat,  barley,  dhura,  etc.) 
"  springeth  from  thy  back.  Thou  makest  the  earth  to  bring 
"  forth  fruit  so  that  gods  and  men  may  have  abundance, 
"  and  cattle  like  unto  the  Cow-cfoddess  Mehurt  are  seen 
"  in  thy  fields.  When  thou  art  at  rest  the  darkness  cometh, 
"  and  when  thou  openest  thy  two  eyes,  light  is  produced 

" Thou  art  the  great  god  who  didst  stretch 

"  out  the  heavens,  who  makest  thy  Disk  to  revolve  in  the 
"  body  of  Nut,  and  to  enter  therein  in  thy  name  of  Ra ; 
"  thou  art  the  fashioner  of  gods  and  men,  and  of  everything 
"  which  existeth,  thou  art  the  maker  of  all  countries  and 
"  lands,   and    of  the   Great   Green  [Sea]   in   thy  name   of 

"  '  Kheper-ta,'  H         ;    thou    dost    brinij    the     Nile    out 

"  from  his  cavern,  thou  makest  the  staff  of  life  to  flourish, 
"  thou  makest  the  grain  to  come  forth  therefrom  in  thy 
"  name  of  Nu  the  Aged,  thou  makest  the  celestial  deep  to 

1  For  the  hieratic  text  see  Lepsius,  Denkmii/er,  Abth.  VI,  Bl.  118. 


The  Gods  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead  173 

"  bring  forth,  thou  makest  water  to  appear  on  the  mountains 
"  to  give  Hfe  to  men  and  women."  Among  the  titles  of 
this  ""od  are  : — 

Babe,  who  art  born  daily,   7^1^(llPP°    ' 


I. 


2.  Aged  One,   dweller  in  the  eternal  borders,  f% 

3.  Exalted  Being,  the  unapproachable  one,  ^^^T  ]] 

4.  Hidden  One,  his  form  cannot  be  known,  (]  1[^ 

Khnemu,  Q  ^^^^  ^  3 ,   was  the   first   member  of  the 

great  triad  of  the  First  Cataract,  which  was  worshipped  in  a 
temple    on    the    Island    of    Elephantine  ;    the    second  and 

third    members    were    Sati    and    Anqet,      (C,  J) '  T^  (2\ ' 

respectively.  The  cult  of  this  god  is  very  ancient,  and  we 
find  his  name  preserved  by  the  Gnostics,  two  or  three 
centuries  after  Christ.  The  animal  in  which  Khnemu 
became  incarnate  was  the  ram,  with  flat  horns  projecting  at 
right  angles  to  his  head  ;  this  ram  disappears  from  the  monu- 
ments before  the  period  of  the  Xllth  dynasty.  Khnemu  is 
usually  depicted  as  a  ram-headed  man,  seated  or  standing, 
who  holds  in  his  hands  the  symbols  of  "  serenity  "  and 
"life."  He  wears  the  White  Crown,  to  which  are  attached 
a  pair  of  horns,  a  pair  of  plumes,  and  a  disk.  He  possessed 
many  attributes,  and  from  the  earliest  times,  whether  as 
a  Water-god,  or  a  Sun-god,  he  was  regarded  as  one  of  the 
creators  of  the  universe.  His  name  Khnemu  seems  to  be 
connected  with  words  which  mean  "to  build,"  "  to  fashion," 
"to  put  together,"  and  he  "united"  the  sun  and  moon  at 
various  seasons  of  the  year,  and  built  up  the  gods,  and  men, 
and  the  year.  He  made  the  cosmic  egg  which  contained 
the  sun,  and  he  fashioned  man  on  a  potter's  wheel. 
Khnemu  was  the  god/>ar  excellence  of  the  First  Cataract, 
and  his  principal  sanctuaries  were  at  Philae  and  Elephantine. 
In  very  early  times  he  was  merely  the  local  Water-god  of  the 
Cataract  region,  and  it  is  possible  that  he  was  the  personi- 
fication of  the  Nile-flood  ;    but  later  he  was  regarded  as 


I "74  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 


the   Nile-god   of  all    Egypt,   and    the    attributes   of  many 
creator-gods  were  bestowed  upon  him.     Thus  he  was  "  the 

father  in  the  beginning,"     ^    ^=^]£^ a;  "  the  Maker  of 

"  things  which  are,  Creator  of  things  which  shall  be.  Source 
"  of  the    lands,   Father    of  fathers.   Mother   of   mothers," 

^  '    '^^   '   /'/s^  />^  /5*Ci      ^         '=^ 


W 

"  Father  of  the  fathers  of  the  gods  and  goddesses,  lord  of 
"  things  created  in  himself,  maker  of  heaven,  and  earth,  and 
* '  the  Tuat,  and  water,  and  the  mountains, "         2^^=>_  ^'wwv  p]  p]  p] 

AAAAAA     -     —     - 


:^  n^^  ^^  ®  /www  r^^  ;  "  supporter  of  the  sky  upon 


its  four  pillars,  raised  up  of  the  same  in  the  firmament  (?)  " 

united  within  himself  the  souls  of  the  gods  Ra,  Shu,  Keb, 
and  Osiris,  and  in  this  aspect  he  is  represented  in  pictures 
with  four  rams'  heads  upon  a  human  body  ;  these,  according 
to  Brugsch,  represented  fire,  air,  earth,  and  water.  A  legend, 
which  is  cut  on  a  rock  on  the  Island  of  Sahal  in  the  First 
Cataract,  states  that  a  great  famine  which  lasted  seven  years 
came  upon  Egypt  in  the  reign  of  Tcheser,  a  king  of  the 
Ilird  dynasty.  This  famine  was  due  to  the  neglect  of 
Khnemu  by  the  Egyptians,  and  to  the  niggardliness  of  the 
offerings  which  they  made  to  him.  When  the  country  was 
well-nigh  ruined,  the  king  went  to  the  temple  of  Khnemu  at 
Elephantine,  and  suitable  offerings  having  been  made,  the 
god  appeared  to  him,  and  proclaimed  himself  to  be  the  Nile, 
and  promised  to  restore  the  Inundation  provided  that  the 
kino-  restored  his  worship  and  endowed  his  temples  suitably. 
When  these  things  were  done,  Khnemu  made  the  Nile  to 

flow  forth    from    his    two    caverns    (Qerti,  ^_^^  2],    and 

prosperity  was  restored  to  Egypt.  The  Egyptians  dis- 
tincruished,  in  the  late  period,  seven  forms  of  Khnemu  : 
I.  Khnemu.  the  modeller;  2.  Khnemu,  Governor  of 
Egypt;  3.  Khnemu,  the  weaver  (?) ;  4.  Khnemu,  Governor 
of  the  House  of  Life  ;  5.  Khnemu,  Lord  of  the  Land  of 
Life  ;  6.  Khnemu,  Governor  of  the  pleasures  of  the  Ankhet 
Chamber ;  7.  Khnemu,  the  Lord. 


The  Gods  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead         175 

Shu  P^f^'  the  second  member  of  the  company    of 

the  gods  of  Anu,  was  the  firstborn  son  of  Ra,  Ra-Temu, 
or  Tum,  by  the  goddess  Hathor,  the  sky,  and  was  the 
twin  brother  of  Tefnut.  He  typified  the  light,  and  dryness, 
and  dry  objects.  He  Hfted  up  the  sky,  Nut,  from  the 
earth,  Keb,  and  placed  it  upon  the  steps  ^  which  were  in 
Khemenu.  He  is  usually  depicted  in  the  form  of  a  man, 
who  wears  upon  his  head  a  feather  f) ,  or  feathers  (llj , 
and  holds  in  his  hand  the  sceptre  | .  At  other  times  he 
appears  in  the  form  of  a  man  with  upraised  arms  ;  on 
his  head  he  has  the  emblem  -SS) ,  and  he  is  often 
accompanied  by  1 1 1 1  >   the    four   pillars    of   heaven,    i.e., 

the  cardinal  points.  Among  the  va^^ny  faience  amulets  which 
are  found  in  tombs  are  two  that  have  reference  to  Shu  : 
the  little  models  of  steps  /\  typify  the  steps  upon  which  Shu 

rested   the  sky  in    Khemenu    A  \\  ^fcv  y^  U  ^  -  =  ^  oil  ^ 

and  the  crouching  figure  of  a  god  supporting  the  sun's 
disk  symbolizes  his  act  of  raising  the  sun's  disk  into  the 
space  between  sky  and  earth  at  the  time  when  he 
separated  Nut  from  Keb.  He  may  be  compared  to  the  Atlas 
of  classical  writers.  From  an  inscription  published  by 
Brugsch  in  his  Did.  G^og.,  p.  211,  and  in  his  T/iesaurtts, 
p.  500,  we  see  plainly  that  Shu  and  Tefnut  were  gods 
of  Sudani  or  Nubian  origin,  and  that  their  worship  was 
introduced  into  the  Island  of  Senmut,  in  the  First  Cataract, 
from  the  South.  The  description  of  the  advent  of  these 
gods  is  not  only  depicted  on  the  walls  of  the  temple  of 
Philae,  but  also  on  many  other  temples  of  the  Graeco- 
Roman  Period.  The  texts  recording  the  legend  of  the 
advent  of  the  gods  have  been  collected  and  published  by 
Dr.  H.  Junker,  in  Der  Auszug  der  Hathor-Tefnut  aus 
Nubien  (Abhandl.  der  Konigl.  Preuss.  Akad.  Berlin,  191 1). 

Tefnut  ^Jj,the  third  member    of   the    company 

of  the  gods  of  Anu,  was  the  daughter  of  Ra,  Ra-Temu, 
or  Temu,  and  twin  sister  of  Shu;  she  represented  in  one 
form  moisture,  and  in  another  aspect  she  seems  to 
personify  the  power  of  sunlight.     She  is  depicted  in  the 


176  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

form  of  a  woman,  usually  with  the  head  of  a  lioness 
surmounted  by  a  disk  or  uraeus,  or  both  ;  in  faience, 
however,  the  twin  brother  and  sister  have  the  head  of 
a  lion  and  the  head  of  a  lioness  respectively.  The 
oriijinal  home  of  Tefnut  was  the  Nubian  deserts,  throu^rh 
which  she  roamed,  drenched  in  the  blood  of  her  enemies, 
whose  flesh  she  tore  off  their  bodies  and  ate,  and  whose 
blood  she  drank.  Fire  flew  out  of  her  eyes,  and  she 
breathed  fire  from  her  mouth.  In  the  Pyramid  Texts  the 
two  gods  play  a  curious  part,  Shu  being-  supposed  to 
carry  away  hunger  from  the  deceased,  and  Tefnut  his 
thirst.^ 

Keb  "^t  J  ^ ,  the  fourth  member  of  the  company  of 

the  gods  of  Anu,  was  the  son  of  Shu,  husband  of  Nut, 
and  by  her  father  of  Osiris,  I  sis.  Set,  and  Nephthys. 
Originally  he  was  the  god    of    the    earth,    and    is    called 

both    the     "father    of    the    gods"  Ml''     ^^^^     ^^ 

"  erpa     u      (i.e.,  the  tribal,  hereditary  head)  of  the  gods." 

He  is  depicted  in  human  form,  sometimes  with  a  crown 

upon  his  head  and  the  sceptre  |  in  his  right  hand  ;    and 

sometimes  he  has  upon  his  head  a  goose,  which  bird  was 
one  of  his   incarnations.      In    many    places    he    is    called 

the  "great  cackler  "  ^O^" '^  ^ '^^  ^^  r^  >  ^"^^  ^^^  ^^s 
supposed  to  have  laid  the  egg  from  which  the  world 
sprang.  Already  in  the  Pyramid  Texts  he  has  become  a 
god  of  the  dead  by  virtue  of  representing  the  earth 
wherein  the  deceased  was  laid. 

Asar  or  Ser  rl^,  the  sixth  member  of  the  company  of 

the  gods  of  Anu,  was,  according  to  Heliopolitan  tradition, 
the  son  of  Keb  and  Nut,  and  the  husband  of  his  sister  I  sis, 
the  father  of  "  Horus,  the  son  of  Isis,"  and  the  brother  of 
Set  and  Nephthys.  The  version  by  Plutarch  of  his  suffer- 
ings and  death  has  been  already  described  (see  pp.  53  ff.). 
Whatever  may  have  been  the  foundation  of  the  legend,  it  is 
pretty  certain  that  his  character  as  a  god  of  the  dead  was 

Travaux,  t.  V,  p.   10  (1.  61). 


The  Gods  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead         177 

well  defined  long  before  the  versions  of  the  Pyramid  Texts 
known  to  us  were  written,  and  the  only  important  change 
which  took  place  in  the  views  of  the  Egyptians  concerning 
him  in  later  days  was  the  ascription  to  him  of  the  attributes 
which  in  the  early  dynasties  were  regarded  as  belonging 
only  to  Ra  or  to  Ra-Temu.  Originally  Osiris  was  the 
personification  of  the  Nile-flood,  and  among  his  attributes 
was  that  of  a  destroying  god  ;  he  may  also  be  said  to  have 
represented  the  sun  after  he  had  set,  and  as  such  was  the 
emblem  of  the  motionless  dead  ;  later  texts  identify  him 
with  the  moon.  The  Egyptians  asserted  that  he  was  the 
father  of  the  gods  who  had  given  him  birth,  and,  as  he  was 
the  god  both  of  Yesterday,  i.e.,  the  Past,  and  of  To-day, 
i.e.,  the  Present,  he  became  the  type  of  eternal  existence 
and  the  symbol  of  immortality  ;  as  such  he  usurped  not 
only  the  attributes  of  Ra,  but  those  of  every  other  god,  and 
at  length  he  became  both  the  god  of  the  dead  and  the  god 
of  the  living.  As  judge  of  the  dead  he  was  believed  to 
exercise  functions  similar  to  those  attributed  to  God. 
Alone  among  all  the  many  gods  of  Egypt,  Osiris  was 
chosen  as  the  type  of  what  the  deceased  hoped  to  become 
when,  his  body  having  been  mummified  in  the  prescribed 
way  and  ceremonies  proper  to  the  occasion  having  been 
performed  and  the  prayers  said,  his  glorified  body  should 
enter  into  the  presence  of  Osiris  in  heaven  ;  to  him  as  the 
"  lord  of  truth  "  and  the  "  lord  of  eternity,"  by  which  titles 
as  judge  of  the  dead  he  was  commonly  addressed,  the 
deceased  appealed  to  make  his  flesh  to  germinate  and  to 
save  his  body  from  decay. ^  The  various  forms  in  which 
Osiris  is  depicted  are  too  numerous  to  be  described  here,^ 
but  he  is  usually  represented  in  the  form  of  a  mummy 
wearing  the  White  Crown  and  holding  in  his  hands 
the  emblems  of  sovereignty  and  power  and  serenity.  A 
very  complete  series  of  illustrations  of  the  forms  of  Osiris  is 

.  compare  (jt-^q  ^  IJlSfj-i-^^® 


^Tl^^^^ii^::!:^11at^' 


See  Chapter  CLIV  of  the  Theban  Recension. 

2  For  the  Iconography  of  Osiris  see  Budge,  Osiris  and  the  Egyptian 
Resurrection,  Vol.  I,  p.  24. 

VOL.  I.  N 


178  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

given  by  Lanzone  in  his  Dizionario,  taw.  258-299.  The 
ceremonies  connected  with  the  celebration  of  the  events  of 
the  sufferings,  the  death,  and  the  resurrection  of  Osiris 
occupied  a  very  prominent  part  in  the  religious  observances 
of  the  Egyptians,  and  in  the  month  of  Choiak  a  representa- 
tion of  them  took  place  in  various  temples  in  Egypt ;  the 
text  of  a  minute  description  of  the  ceremonies  performed  at 
this  miracle-play  has  been  published  by  M.  Loret  in 
Recueil de  Travaitx,  tom.  Ill,  pp.  43  ff,  and  in  a  subsequent 
volume.  A  perusal  of  this  work  explains  the  signification 
of  many  of  the  ceremonies  connected  with  the  burial  of  the 
dead,  the  use  of  amulets,  and  certain  parts  of  the  funeral 
ritual  ;  and  the  work  in  this  form  being  of  a  late  date  proves 
that  the  doctrine  of  immortality,  gained  through  the  god 
who  was  "  lord  of  the  heavens  and  of  the  earth,  of  the 
"  underworld  and  of  the  waters,  of  the  mountains,  and  of 
"  all  which  the  sun  goeth  round  in  his  course,"  ^  had 
remained  practically  unchanged  for  at  least  four  thousand 
years  of  its  existence.  For  the  early  history  of  Osiris  see 
the  chapter  entitled  "  The  Legend  of  Osiris." 

Ast  or  Set   ft  "^  r?j '  the  seventh  member  of  the  company 

of  the  gods  of  Anu,  was  the  wife  of  Osiris  and  the  mother 
of  Horus  ;  her  woes  have  been  described  both  by  Egyptian 
and  Greek  writers.^  Her  commonest  names  are  "  the  great 
"  goddess,  the  divine  mother,  the  mistress  of  words  of  power 
"  or  enchantments  ";  in  later  times  she  is  called  the  "  mother 
of  the  gods,"  and  the  "living  one."  She  is  usually  depicted 
in  the  form  of  a  woman,  with  a  headdress  in  the  shape  of  a 

seat  [|,  the  value  of  the  hieroglyph  for  which   forms  her 

name.  The  animal  in  which  she  sometimes  became 
incarnate  was  the  cow,  hence  she  sometimes  wears  upon 
her  head  the  horns  of  that  animal  accompanied  by  plumes 
and  feathers.  In  one  aspect  she  is  identified  with  the 
goddess  Selk  or  Serq,  and  she  then  has  upon  her  head  a 

AA/^WV    ^mnD     I  III  I  O 

*  Chabas,  Un  Hymne  a  Osiris  (in  Revue  Archioloi:^ique,  t.  XIV,  pp.  65  ff.); 
Horrack,  Les  Lamentations  d'Jsis  et  dc  Nephthys,  Paris,  1866  ;  Tfie  Festival 
Songs  of  I  sis  and  Nephthys  (in  Archaeo/ogia,  Vol.  LI  I,  London,  1891); 
Golenischeff,  Die  Metternichstele,  Leipzig,  1877;  Plutarch,  De  hide  et 
OsiridCf  etc. 


The  Gods  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead         179 

scorpion,  the  emblem  of  that  goddess  ;  in  another  aspect 
she  is  united  to  the  star  Sothis,  and  then  a  star  i<:  is  added 
to  her  crown.  She  is,  however,  most  commonly  represented 
as  the  mother  suckling  her  child  Horus,  and  figures  of  her 
in  this  aspect,  in  bronze  and  faience,  exist  in  thousands. 
As  a  nature-goddess  she  is  seen  standing  in  the  Boat  of  the 
Sun,  and  she  was  probably  the  deity  of  the  dawn. 

Heru  or   Horus  ^\  ,  the  Sun-god,  was  originally  a 

totally  distinct  god  from  Horus,  the  son  of  Osiris  and  Isis, 
but  in  very  early  times  it  seems  that  the  two  gods  were 
confounded,  and  that  the  attributes  of  the  one  were  ascribed 
to  the  other ;  the  fight  which  Horus  the  Sun-god  waged 
against  night  and  darkness  was  also  at  a  very  early  period 
identified  with  the  combat  between  Horus,  the  son  of  Isis, 
and  her  brother  Set.     The  visible  emblem  of  the  Sun-god 

was  at  a  very  early  date  the  hawk  ^^ ,  which  was  probably 
the  first  living  thing  worshipped  by  the  early  Egyptians  ; 
already  in  the  Pyramid  Texts  the  hawk  on  a  standard  ^ 
is  used  indiscriminately  with  |  to  represent  the  word  "god." 
The  principal  forms  of  Horus  the  Sun-god,  which  probably 
represent  the  sun  at  various  periods  of  the  day  and  night, 
are: — Heru-ur  ^^  f^  ('Apwi7pt9),  "Horus  the  Great"; 
Heru-p-khart  ?N^  °  ^^  ^,  "  Horus  the  Child  "  ;  Heru- 
merti  ^^  "^  O  ^  '  "  ^o^'-'^  ^f  the  two  eyes,"  i.e.,  of  the 
sun  and  moon ;  ^  Heru-nub  '^ ,  "the  golden  Horus"; 
Heru-khent-khat  ^vfflh  5  Heru-khent-an-ariti  (i*)  ^^ 
f[jh  -"-  o  ^'  "  Ho^us  dwelling  in  blindness  "  ;  Heru-khuti 
^^,  "  Horus  of  the  two  horizons,"^  Harmakhis,  the  type 

^  A  very  interesting  figure  of  this  god  represents  him  holding  his  eyes 
e^^  ^^^   in  his  hands;   see  Lanzone,  Dizionario,  p.  6i8. 

2  I.e.,  Horus  between  the  mountains  of    jl  (^>^   Bekhatet  and 

^>  Qy\y]   Manu,  the  most  easterly  and  westerly  points  of  the  sun's  course, 
and  the  places  where  he  rose  and  set. 


i8o  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

of  which  on  earth  was  the  Sphinx ;  Heru-sma-taui  ^^  1  '"  , 
"  Horus  the  uniter  of  the  North  and  South";  Heru-hekenu 
5  ^O^  <^'    "  H^^^^s    ^^    Heken";    and     Heru-behutet 


Horus  of  Behutet."^     The    cippi    of    Horus, 

which  became  so  common  at  a  late  period  in  Egypt,  seem 
to  unite  the  idea  of  the  physical  and  moral  conceptions  of 
Horus  the  Sun-god  and  of  Horus  the  son  of  Osiris  and  Isis. 

Horus,  the  son  of  Osiris  and   Isis,  ^^      jj^,  appears 

in    Egyptian  texts   usually  as    Heru-p-khart  ^^n<=>2j), 

or  "  Horus  the  Child,"  who  afterwards  became  the  "  avenger 
of  his  father  Osiris,"  and  occupied  his  throne,  as  we  are 
told  in  many  places  in  the  Book  of  the  Dead.  In  the 
Pyramid  Texts  the  deceased  is  identified  with  Heru-p-khart, 
and  a  reference  is  made  to  the  fact  that  the  god  is  always 
represented  with  a  finger  in  his  mouth. ^  The  curious 
legend  which  Plutarch  relates  concerning  Harpokrates  and 
the  cause  of  his  lameness^  is  probably  based  upon  the 
passage  in  the  history  of  Osiris  and  Isis  given  in  a  Hymn  to 
Osiris  of  the  XVIIIth  dynasty.* 

Set    P^^y    or    Sutekh   ^£^2^5-^,    Gr.     Srjr,    the 

eighth  member  of  the  company  of  the  gods  of  Anu,  was  the 
son  of  Keb  and  Nut,  and  the  husband  of  his  sister 
Nephthys.  The  worship  of  this  god  is  exceedingly  old, 
and  in  the  Pyramid  Texts  we  find  that  he  is  often  mentioned 
with  Horus  and  the  other  gods  of  the  Heliopolitan  company 

^  For  figures  of  these  various  forms  of  Horus,  see  Lanzone,  op.  cit.^ 
taw.  214  fT.  

n  V\.    Recueil  de  Travaux,  t.  V,  p.  44  (1.  301). 

^  Trtv  c  ^\<Tiv  ^leTO.  7rjv  reXevTTJu  t^  'Oai'pi^o'i  av^f^ievofievov,  rcKeii' 
rjXirofiTtvoi'  Kdl  (iffOei'TJ  rots  KUTwOei/  <^{vioit  tov  'Ap7roK/>i'nt/f.  De  Iside  et 
O Stride,  §  xix. 


^;3i    ^    "r^^i  ""^^  ^     %  •     Ledrain,    Monuments    Egyptiens^ 

PI.  XXV,  11.  2,  3. 


The  Gods  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead         i8i 

in  terms  of  reverence.  He  was  also  believed  to  perform 
friendly  offices  for  the  deceased,  and  to  be  a  god  of  the 
Sekhet-Aaru,  or  abode  of  the  blessed  dead.  He  was  the 
king  of  the  South  as  Horuswas  the  king  of  the  North,  and  the 
power  of  each  was  equal.  He  is  usually  depicted  in  human 
form  with  the  head  of  an  animal  which  has  not  yet  been 
identified  ;  in  later  times  the  head  of  the  ass  was  confounded 
with  it,  but  the  figures  of  the  god  in  bronze  which  are  pre- 
served in  the  British  Museum  and  elsewhere  prove  beyond 
a  doubt  that  the  head  of  Set  is  that  of  an  animal  unknown 
to  us.  The  Set  animal  is  not  the  okapi,  as  some  Egypto- 
logists think  ;  the  opinion  of  naturalists  has  settled  this 
question.  In  the  early  dynasties  Set  was  a  beneficent  god, 
and  one  whose  favour  was  sought  after  by  the  living  and 
by  the  dead,  and  so  late  as  the  XlXth  dynasty  kings 
delighted  to  call  themselves  "  beloved  of  Set."  After  the 
cult  of  Osiris  was  firmly  established,  and  this  god  was  the 
"great  god"  of  all  Egypt,  it  became  the  fashion  to  regard 
Set  as  the  origin  of  all  evil,  and  his  statues  and  Images 
were  so  effectually  destroyed  that  only  a  few  which  escaped 
by  accident  have  come  down  to  us.^  Originally  Set,  or 
Sut,  represented  darkness  and  night,  and  perhaps  the 
desert,  and  was  the  opposite  of  Horus  ;^  that  Horus  and 
Set  were  opposite  aspects  or  forms  of  the  same  god  is 
proved  by  the  figure  given  by  Lanzone  [Dizionario,  tav.  ^y, 
No.  2),  where  we  see  the  head  of  Set  and  the  head 
of  Horus  upon  one  body.  The  natural  opposition  of 
light  (Horus)  and  darkness  (Set)  was  at  an  early  period 
confounded  with  the  battle  which  took  place  between 
Horus,  the  son  of  Isis,  and  Set,  wherein  Isis  intervened, 
and  it  seems  that  the  moral  idea  of  the  battle  of  rieht 
agamst  wrong^  became  attached  to  the  latter  combat,  which 
was  undertaken  by  Horus  to  avenge  his  father's  murder 
by  Set. 

^  See   the   two   bronze   figures    of  the   god   in    the    British    Museum 
(Fourth  Egyptian  Room,  Nos.  18191,  22897). 

2  In  the  Pyramid  of  Unas,  1.   190,  they  are  called  the  <:z>  0    v  '  ' 

or  "  two  combatants  " ;  and  see  Pyramid  of  Teta,  I.  69,  where  we  have  the 

spelling  <=>|  ^^. 

^  On  the  personification  of  evil  by  Set,  see  Wiedemann,  Die  Religion^ 
p.  117. 


i82  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

Nebt-het,   or  Nephthys  T]  ^ ,  the  last  member  of  the 

company  of  the  gods  of  Anu,  was  the  daughter  of  Keb  and 
Nut,  the  sister  of  Osiris  and  Isis,  and  the  sister  and  wife  of 
Set.  When  the  sun  rose  at  the  creation  out  of  the  primeval 
waters  Nephthys  occupied  a  place  in  his  boat  with  Isis  and 
other  deities  ;  as  a  nature-goddess  she  either  represents  the 
day  before  sunrise  or  after  sunset,  but  no  portion  of  the 
night.  She  is  depicted  in  the  form  of  a  woman,  having 
upon  her  head   the  hieroglyphs,  the  values  of  which  form 

her  name,   "lady  of  the  house"  X\  .     A  legend  preserved 

by  Plutarch^  makes  her  the  mother  of  Anpu,  or  Anubis, 
by  Osiris.  In  Egyptian  texts  Anpu  is  called  the  son  of 
Ra.^  In  religious  texts  Nephthys  is  made  to  be  the 
companion  of  Isis  in  all  her  troubles,  and  her  grief  for  her 
brother's  death  is  as  great  as  that  of  his  wife. 

Anpu,  or  Anubis,  IJn^r^,   the   son  of  Osiris  or  Ra, 

sometimes  by  Isis  and  sometimes  by  Nephthys,  seems  to 
represent  as  a  nature-god  either  the  darkest  part  of  the 
night  or  the  earliest  dawn.  He  is  depicted  either  in  human 
form  with  a  dog's  head,  or  as  a  dog.^  In  the  legend  of 
Osiris  and  Isis,  Anubis  played  a  prominent  part  in  con- 
nexion with  the  finding  of  the  dead  body  of  Osiris  ;  one 
tradition  asserts  that  he  only  found  it  with  the  help  of  dogs. 
In  papyri  we  see  him  standing  as  a  guard  and  protector  of 
the  deceased  lying  upon  the  bier;  in  the  Judgment  Scene  he 
is  found  as  the  guard  of  the  balance,  the  pointer  of  which 
he  watches  with  crreat  diliofence.  He  was  the  "  Embalmer  " 
par  excellence,  and  as  such  was  the  god  of  the  chamber  of 
embalmment,  and  eventually  he  presided  over  the  whole  of 
the  "  funeral  mountain."  He  is  always  regarded  in  the 
Book  of  the  Dead  as  the  messenger  of  Osiris,  but  in  the 
older  text  he  was  the  chief  envoy  of  Ra,  who  sent  him  to 
embalm  the  body  of  Osiris. 

Up-uat,    the    \J  £5=2  ^^    of  the  Pyramid  Text,*  or 

"  Opener  of  the  ways,"  was  depicted  in  the  form  of  a  wolf, 

^  De  Iside  et  Osiride,  §  14.  2  gge  Lanzone,  op.  cit.,  p.  65. 

3  In  pictures  the  animal   which   symbolizes  Anubis    often    resembles 
a  jackal  as  much  as  a  dog. 
*  Pyramid  of  Unas,  1.  187. 


The  Gods  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead         183 

but  Anubis  and  Up-uat  are  often  confounded  in  funerary- 
scenes.  On  sepulchral  stelae  and  other  monuments  two 
dog-like  animals  are  frequently  depicted  ;  one  of  these 
represents  Anubis,  and  the  other  Up-uat,  and  they  probably 
have  some  connexion  with  the  northern  and  southern  parts 
of  the  funereal  world.  According  to  a  legend  described  by 
Professor  Maspero  the  god  Anubis  led  the  souls  of  the 
dead  to  the  Elysian  Fields  in  the  Great  Oasis. ^ 

Among  the  primeval  gods  are  two,  Hu  x^^,  and 
Saa    1  (I  .^m  ^^^,  who  are  seen  in  the  Boat  of  the  Sun 

at  the  creation.  They  are  the  children  of  Temu,  or  Temu- 
Ra,  but  the  exact  part  which  they  play  as  nature-gods  has  not 
yet,  it  seems,  been  satisfactorily  made  out.  They  seem  to 
be  personifications  of  two  of  the  senses.  The  first  mention 
of  them  in  the  Pyramid  Texts  records  their  subjugation  by 
the  deceased,^  but  in  the  Theban  Book  of  the  Dead  they 
appear  among  the  company  of  the  gods  who  are  present 
when  the  soul  of  the  deceased  is  being  weighed  in  the 
balance. 

Tehuti,  or  Thoth,  j^,  represented  the  divine  intelli- 
gence, which  at  creation  uttered  the  words  that  when 
spoken  turned  into  the  objects  of  the  material  world.  He 
was  self-produced,  and  was  the  great  god  of  the  earth,  air, 
sea,  and  sky  ;  and  he  united  in  himself  the  attributes  of 
many  gods.  He  was  the  scribe  of  the  gods,  and,  as  such, 
he  was  regarded  as  the  inventor  of  all  the  arts  and  sciences 
known  to  the  Egyptians  ;  some  of  his  titles  are  "lord  of 
writing,"  "  master  of  papyrus,"  "maker  of  the  palette  and 
the  ink-jar,"  "  the  mighty  speaker,"  "  the  sweet-tongued  "  ; 
and  the  words  and  compositions  which  he  recited  on  behalf 
of  the  deceased  preserved  the  latter  from  the  influence  of 
hostile  powers  and  made  him  invincible  in  the  Other  World. 
He  was  the  god  of  right  and  truth,  wherein  he  lived,  and 
whereby  he  established  the  world  and  all  that  is  in  it.  As 
the  chronologer  of  heaven  and  earth,  he  became  the  god  of 

^  See  Le  Nom  antique  de  la  Grande-Oasis  (in  Journal  Asiatique, 
IX®  S^rie,  torn.  I,  pp.  233-40). 

Unas,  1.  439. 


184  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

the  moon  ;  and  as  the  reckoner  of  time,  he  obtained  his 
name  Tehuti,  i.e.,  "  the  measurer  "  ;  in  these  capacities  he 
had  the  power  to  g-rant  Hfe  for  millions  of  years  to  the 
deceased.  When  the  great  combat  took  place  between 
Horus  and  Set,  or  between  Horus,  the  son  of  Isis,  and  Set, 
Thoth  was  present  as  judge,  and  in  the  struggle  between 
the  two  gods  he  gave  to  Isis  the  cow's  head  in  the 
place  of  her  own,  which  had  been  cut  off  by  Horus  in  his 
rage  at  her  interference  ;  having  reference  to  this  fact  he  is 

called  Up-rehui  ^||^^^^  |>    "The  judge  of  the  two 

Men,  or   Fighters."     One  of  the  Egyptian  names  for  the 

ibis  was       tQ>  ^^^   Tek/i,  and  the  similarity  of  the  sound  of 

this  word  to  that  of  Tehu,  the  name  of  the  moon  as  a 
measurer  of  time,  probably  led  the  Egyptians  to  depict  the 
god  in  the  form  of  an  ibis,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  the 
dog-headed  ape  was  generally  considered  to  be  the  animal 
sacred  to  him.  It  has  been  thought  that  there  were  two 
gods  called  Thoth,  one  being  a  form  of  Shu  ;  but  the 
attributes  belonging  to  each  have  not  yet  been  satisfactorily 
defined.  In  the  monuments  and  papyri  Thoth  appears  in 
the  form  of  a  man  with  the  head  of  an  ibis,  which  is  some- 
times surmounted  by  the  crown  ^2, ,  or  [[] .  or  ^&^ ,  or  by 
disk  and  horns  X^ ,  or  O  ,  and  he  holds  in  his  left  hand 
the  sceptre  1 ,  and  in  the  right  ■¥•;  sometimes  he  is  depicted 

holding  his  ink-jar  \J  and  the  crescent  moon  O ,  and  some- 
times he  appears  in  the  form  of  an  ape  holding  a  palette  full 
of  writing-reeds.^  Thoth  is  mentioned  in  the  Pyramid 
Texts^  as  the  brother  of  Osiris,  but  whether  he  is  the  same 
Thoth  who  is  called  the  "  Lord  of  Khemenu  "  and  the 
"  Scribe  of  the  gods  "  is  doubtful. 

Maat  '^^  c^%S\,  the  female  counterpart  of  Thoth,  was, 

according  to  Heliopolitan  tradition,  the  daughter  of 
Ra,  and  a  very  ancient  goddess  ;  she  seems  to  have 
assisted  Ptah  and  Khnemu  in  carrying  out  rightly  the 
work  of  creation  ordered  by  Thoth.  There  is  no  one 
word  which  will  exactly  describe  the  Egyptian  conception 

^  See  Lanzone,  op.  cit.,  tav.  304,  No.  i. 
^  Pyramid  of  Unas,  1.  236. 


The  Gods  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead  185 

of  Maat  both  from  a  physical  and  from  a  moral  point 
of  view  ;  but  the  fundamental  idea  of  the  word  is 
"  straight,"  and  from  the  Egyptian  texts  it  is  clear  that 
niadt  meant  right,  true,  truth,  real,  genuine,  upright, 
righteous,  just,  steadfast,  unalterable,  etc.  Thus  already 
in  the  Prisse  Papyrus  it  is  said  :  "  Great  is  viadf,  the 
"  mighty  and  unalterable,  and  it  hath  never  been  broken 
"  since  the  time  of  Osiris,"^  and  Ptah-hetep  counsels  his 
listener  to  "  make  madi,  or  right  and  truth,  to  flourish."^ 

The  just,    upright,    and   straight  man    is    vmdi  . 0 :  n?^, 

and  in  a  book  of  moral  precepts  it  is  said,  "  God  will  judge 
the  right  (-^)-  ^^1^  V^x^^^^^ 
H  i>  Maat,  the  goddess  of  the  unalterable  laws  of 
leaven,  and  the  daughter  of  Ra,  is  depicted  in  female 
form,  with  the  feather  h ,  emblematic  of  jjzadt,  on  her  head, 
or  with  the  feather  alone  for  a  head,  and  the  sceptre  | 
in  one  hand,  and  ■¥•  in  the  other.-^     In  the  Judgment  Scene 

two  Maat  goddesses  appear ;  one  probably  is  the 
personification  of  physical  law  and  the  other  of  moral 
rectitude  ;  or  one  may  have  presided  over  Upper  Egypt, 
and    the    other    over    Lower    Egypt. 

Het-heru,  or  Hathor  ^,  the    "house  of  Horus," 

was  the  goddess  of  the  sky  wherein  Horus  the  Sun- 
god  rose  and  set.  Subsequently  a  great  number  of 
goddesses  of  the  same  name  were  developed  from  her, 
and  these  were  identified  with  Isis,  Neith,  lusaset,  and 
many  other  goddesses  whose  attributes  they  absorbed. 
A  group  of  seven  Hathors  is  also  mentioned,  and  these 
appear    to    have    partaken  of  the  nature   of  good   fairies. 

'  p-s-  -7^  5,  ^^-11  ifl  i  ^  -^  ^  ^  )y 

"Page.S,..  .p^^^flr^ 

^  Amelineau,  La  Morale,  p.  138. 

*  The  various  meanings  of  maat  are  illustrated  by  abundant  passages 
from  Egyptian  texts  by  Brugsch,   Worterbiich  (Suppl.),  p.  329. 
^  See  Lanzone,  op.  cif.,  tav.  109. 


i86  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

In  one  form  Hathor  was  the  goddess  of  love,  beauty, 
happiness  ;  and  the  Greeks  identified  her  with  their  own 
Aphrodite.  She  is  often  depicted  in  the  form  of  a  woman 
having-  disk  and  horns  upon  her  head,  and  at  times  she 
has  the  head  of  a  Hon  surmounted  by  a  uraeus.  Often 
she  has  the  form  of  a  cow — the  animal  sacred  to  her — 
and  in  this  form  she  appears  as  the  goddess  of  the  tomb 
or  Ta-Tchertet,  and  she  provides  meat  and  drink  for  the 
deceased.^  As  a  Cow-goddess  she  is  probably  of  Sudani 
orio"in. 

Meht-urt  ^^  <==>  ^u~3|  is    the    personification    of  that 

part  of  the  sky  wherein  the  sun  rises,  and  also  of  that 
part  of  it  in  which  he  takes  his  daily  course  ;  she  is 
depicted  in  the  form  of  a  cow,  along  the  body  of  which 
the  two  barks  of  the  sun  are  seen  sailing.  Already  in 
the  Pyramid  Texts  we  find  the  attribute  of  judge  ascribed 
to  Meh-urt,^  and  down  to  a  very  late  date  the  judgment 
of  the  deceased  in  the  hall  of  Double  Maat  in  the  presence 
of  Thoth  and  the  other  gods  was  believed  to  take  place 
in  the  abode  of  Meh-urt,^  i.e.,  in  the  sky. 

Net,  or  Neith,  ^*^J'  ^^  /^'  "  ^^^  divine  mother, 
the  lady  of  heaven,  the  mistress  of  the  gods,"  was 
one  of  the  most  ancient  deities  of  Egypt,  and  in  the 
Pyramid  Texts  she  appears  as  the  mother  of  Sebek.*  The 
centre  of  her  cult  was  at  Sais  in  the  Delta.  Like  Meh-urt 
she  personifies  the  place  in  the  sky  where  the  sun  rises. 
In  one  form  she  was  the  goddess  of  the  loom  and  shuttle, 
and  also  of  the  chase  ;  in  this  aspect  she  was  identified  by 
the  Greeks  with  Artemis.  She  is  depicted  in  the  form  of  a 
woman,   having  upon  her  head  the  shutde    xix    or  arrows 

\/ ,  or  she  wears  the  crown  >/  and  holds  arrows  1  1 , 
a    bow  vs^,  and    a    sceptre   in    her   left    hand  ;    she    also 

^  A  good  set  of  illustrations  of  this  goddess  will  be  found  in  Lanzone, 
o/>.  at.,  tav.  314  f. 


S--CS]ilkT¥^^i-^"S 


N.^ 


Recueil  de    Travaux,  t.   IV,   p.   48  (1.  427). 


3  Pleyte,  Chapiires  suppliinentaires  dti  Livre  des  Marts   (Chapp.    162, 
162,*  163),  p.  26.  "  Recueil  de  Travaux,  t.  IV,  p.  76  (1.  627). 


The  Gods  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead         187 

appears  in  the  form  of  a  cow.^  The  goddess  Neith  was 
believed  to  be  self-produced,  and  an  ancient  Saite  tradition 
made  her  to  be  the  mother  of  Ra,  the  Sun-god. 

Sekhmet  P^^  J.  was  in  Memphis  the  wife  of  Ptah, 
and  the  mother  of  Nefer-Temu  and  of  I-em-hetep. 
She  was  the  personification  of  the  burning  heat  of  the 
sun,  and  as  such  was  the  destroyer  of  the  enemies  of 
Ra  and  Osiris.  When  Ra  determined  to  punish  mankind 
with  death,  because  they  scoffed  at  him,  he  sent  Sekhmet, 
his  "  eye,"  to  perform  the  work  of  vengeance  ;  illustrative  of 
this  aspect  of  her  is  a  figure  wherein  she  is  depicted  with 
the  sun's  eye  for  a  head.^  Usually  she  has  the  head  of 
a  lion  surmounted  by   the  sun's  disk,    round  which    is    a 

uraeus  ;  and  she  generally  holds  a  sceptre  I,  but  some- 
times a  knife. 

Bast  H  "^  J) .  according  to  one  legend,  was  the  mother 
of  Nefer-Temu.  She  was  the  personification  of  the  gentle 
and  fructifying  heat  of  the  sun,  as  opposed  to  that  personified 
by  Sekhmet.  The  cat  was  sacred  to  Bast,  and  the  goddess 
is  usually  depicted  cat-headed.  The  most  famous  seat  of 
her  worship  was  the  city  of  Bubastis,  the  modern  Tell 
Bastah,  near  Zakazik,  in  the  Delta. 

Nefer-Temu  I  v^  Jj,  was  the  son  either  of  Sekhmet  or 

Bast,  and  he  personified  some  form  of  the  morning  sun. 
He  is  usually  depicted  in  the  form  of  a  man,  with  a  cluster 
of  lotus  flowers  upon  his  head,  but  sometimes  he  has  the 
head  of  a  lion  ;  in  the  \kt\e /a'lence  figures  of  him,  which  are 
so  common,  he  stands  upon  the  back  of  a  lion.^  He  no 
doubt  represents  the  Sun-god  in  the  legend  which  made  him 
to  burst  forth  from  a  lotus,  for  in  the  pyramid  of  Unas  the 
king  is  said  to  : 


■X^aa       em    Nefer-Tenm     etn  sessen  er         sert  Ra 

"  Rise    like  Nefer-Temu  from     the  lotus  (lily)       to   the  nostrils  of  Ra," 

and  to  "  come  forth  on  the  horizon  every  day."* 

*  See  Lanzone,  op.  cit.,  tav.  177.  ^  Ibid.^  op.  cit.^  tav.  364. 
^  Ibid.,  op.  cit.,  tav.  147. 

*  Recueil  de  Travaux,  t.  IV,  p.  45  (1.  394). 


1 88  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

Neheb-ka  ^|JUMl'  is  the  name  of  a  goddess 

who  is  usually  represented  with  the  head  of  a  serpent,  and 
with  whom  the  deceased  identifies  himself. 

Sebak  '  J  fl^^^^^H^'  ^  form  of  Horus  the  Sun-god, 
must  be  distinguished  from  Sebak,  the  companion  of  Set, 
the  opponent  of  Osiris  ;  of  each  of  these  gods  the  crocodile 
was  the  sacred  animal,  and  for  this  reason  probably  the 
gods  themselves  were  confounded.  Sebak- Ra,  the  lord  of 
Ombos,  is  usually  depicted  in  human  form  with  the  head  of 

a  crocodile,  surmounted  by  ^^?  ,  yTy,  or  aQ,  or  ^^} 

Menu  ^  ^  ,2  or   Amsi  ()  ^  "^  ^ ,  is  one  of  the 

most  ancient  gods  of  Egypt.  He  personified  the  power  of 
generation,  or  the  reproductive  force  of  nature  ;  he  was  the 
"father  of  his  own  mother,"  and  was  identified  with 
"  Horus  the  mighty,"  or  with  Horus  the  avenger  of  his 
father  Un-nefer  or  Osiris.  The  Greeks  identified  him  with 
the  god  Pan,  and  called  the  chief  city  where  his  worship 
was  celebrated  Khemmis,^  after  one  of  his  names.  He  is 
depicted  usually  in  the  form  of  a  man  standing  upon  / — i  ; 


and  he  has  upon  his  head  the  plumes,  [H  ,  and  holds  the  flail, 
,  in  his  right  hand,  which  is  raised  above  his  shoulder.* 


Neb-er-tcher  B^  3\^  '^  name  which  signifies  "  lord 

to  the  uttermost  limit,"  i.e.,  "lord  of  the  universe";  this 
name  was  subsequently  given  to  Osiris.  Some  have 
thought  that  it  was  given  to  Osiris  after  the  completed 
re-construction  of  his  body,  which  had  been  hacked  to  pieces 
by  Set. 

Un-nefer  -^^^!I^T  J),    a    name    of    Osiris    in    his 

capacity  of  god  and  judge  of  the  dead  in  the  Underworld. 
The  name  probably  means  "  good  being." 

Astennu   fl    '  ^^  Wj  ,   a  name   given   to   one   of  the 
associates  of  the  god  Thoth,  and  to  Thoth  himself 

^  Lanzone,  op.  cit.,  tav.  353.  -  Also  read  Khem. 

3  In  Egyptian  the  town  is  called  Apu   (1  D  ^  O . 
^  Lanzone,  op.  cit.,  tav.  332. 


The  Gods  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead         189 

Mert-sekert  l<=:>n^  ,   "the  lover  of  silence,"  is 

a  name  of  Isis  or  Hathor  as  goddess  of  the  Underworld. 
The  centre  of  her  cult  was  a  portion  of  Western  Thebes. 
She  is  sometimes  depicted  in  the  form  of  a  woman,  having 
a  disk  and  horns  upon  her  head.^ 


Serq  or  Selk  N         2i|Pr34>  is  a  form  of  the  goddess 

Isis.  She  is  usually  depicted  in  the  form  of  a  woman,  with 
a  scorpion  upon  her  head  ;  occasionally  she  appears  as 
a  scorpion  with  a  woman's  head,  surmounted  by  disk  and 
horns. ^ 

Ta-urt  ^^^<r:=>  (/l  ,  the  Thoueris  of  the  Greeks,  was 

identified  as  the  wife  of  Set  or  Typhon  ;  she  is  also  known 

under    the    names    Apt  [1     M.  and    Sheput       ^  os  •      Her 

common  titles  are  "mistress  of  the  gods,"  |^  |i.  and 
"bearer  of  the  gods"  |T|   '  |  |  |-     She   is   depicted  in   the 

form  of  a  hippopotamus  standing  on  her  hind  legs,  with 
distended    paunch    and    hanging    breasts,  and  one  of  her 

forefeet  rests  upon  V  ,  the  symbol  of  magical  power,  which 

probably  represents  a  part  of  the  organs  of  generation  of 
the  goddess  ;  sometimes  she  has  the  head  of  a  woman,  but 

she  always  wears  the  disk,  horns,  and  plumes    [^  . 

Uatchit  I  ((]'=' (a  '  was   a   form    of   Hathor,   and    was 

identified  with  the  appearance  of  the  sky  in  the  north  when 
the  sun  rose.     She  is  either  depicted  in  the  form  of  a  woman, 

having  upon  her  head  the  Crown  of  the  North  >/  and 
a  sceptre   j] ,  round  which  a  serpent  is  twined,  or  as  a  winged 

uraeus  wearinor  the  Crown  of  the  North.  She  was  the 
principal  goddess  of  the  town  of  Buto,  in  the  Delta. 

Nekhebit  1  J    ^\>  was  a  very  ancient  goddess,  the 

centre  of  whose  cult  was  the  town  of  Nekheb  in  Upper 
Egypt,  the  Eileithyiaspolis  of  the  Greeks,  and  the  modern 
Al-Kab.      She  was  the  tutelary  deity  of  Upper  Egypt  in 

^  See  Lanzone,  tav.  124.  ^  Idtd.,  op.  cit,  tav.  362. 


190  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

very  early  dynastic  times.  She  appears  in  the  form  of 
a  woman,  either  with  the  vulture  headdress,  or  with  the 
head  of  a  vulture,  and  sometimes  as  a  vulture.  Nekhebit 
and  Uatchit  divided  between  them  the  sovereignty  of  all 
Egypt. 

Beb,  Bebti,  Baba,  or  Babu,    J  J  ^>  J  J  -^v' 
J^J^^or   J^^J^^^,    mentioVd 

three  times  in  the  Book  of  the  Dead,  is  the  "  firstborn  son 
of  Osiris,"  and  seems  to  be  one  of  the  gods  of  generation. 

Hapi  §         ;:;:;:::;;;;,  perhaps  originally  Hepr,  is  the  name 

of  the  great  god  of  the  Nile  who  was  worshipped  in   Egypt 

under  two  forms,  i.e.,  "  Hapi  of  the  South,"  8         -^^X  S^' 

and  "  Hapi  of  the  North,"  |         t=t  'W  ^ ;  the  papyrus  was 

the  emblem  of  the  former,  and  the  lotus  of  the  latter. 
From  the  earliest  times  the  Nile  was  regarded  by  the 
Egyptians  as  the  source  of  all  the  prosperity  of  Egypt,  and 
it  was  honoured  as  being  the  type  of  the  life-giving  waters, 
out  of  the  midst  of  which  sprang  the  gods  and  all  created 
things.  In  turn  it  was  identified  with  all  the  gods  of  Egypt, 
new  or  old,  and  its  influence  was  so  great  upon  the  minds 
of  the  Egyptians  that  from  the  earliest  days  they  depicted 
to  themselves  a  material  heaven  wherein  the  Isles  of  the 
Blest  were  laved  by  the  waters  of  a  Celestial  Nile  ;  the  Nile 
of  Egypt  was  only  a  continuation  of  the  Nile  of  heaven. 
Others  again  lived  in  imagination  on  the  banks  of  the 
heavenly  Nile,  whereon  they  built  cities  ;  and  it  seems  as  if 
the  Egyptians  never  succeeded  in  conceiving  a  heaven 
without  a  Nile  and  canals.  The  Nile  is  depicted  in  the 
form  of  a  man,  who  wears  upon  his  head  a  clump  of  papyrus 
or  lotus  flowers  ;  his  breasts  are  androgynous,  indicating 
fertility.  Lanzone  reproduces  an  interesting  scene  ^  in 
which  the  South  and  North  Nile  gods  are  tying  a  papyrus 

and  a  lotus  stalk  around  the  emblem  of  union  1 ,  to  indicate 
the  unity  of  Upper  and  Lower  Egypt,  and  this  emblem  r^|^ 

is  found  cut  upon  the  thrones  of  the  kings  of  Egypt  to 
indicate  their  sovereignty  over  the  regions  traversed  by  the 

^  Dizionario,  tav.  198. 


The  Gods  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead         191 

South  and  North  Niles.  It  has  already  been  said  that 
Hapi  was  identified  with  all  the  gods  in  turn,  and  it  follows 
as  a  matter  of  course  that  the  attributes  of  each  were 
ascribed  to  him  ;  in  one  respect,  however,  he  is  different 
from  them  all,  for  of  him  it  is  written  : — 

He  cannot  be  sculptured    in      stone ;   in  the  images  on  which  men  place 

crowns  and  uraei      he  is  not  made  manifest ;      service  cannot  be  rendered 

<a  \:     /I  Sr  V — ^  ^     ^^  ^^  I 

nor  offerings  made  to  him  ;  not  can  he  be  drawn  in  his  form  of  mystery; 


not     is  known     the  place     where  he  is ;  not        is  he  found         in  the 


UC£  J.^  S^-^  ^ 


I  I  I 
painted  shrine.^ 

Here  the  scribe  gave  to  the  Nile  the  attributes  of  the 
great  and  unknown  God  its  Maker. 

In  the  Pyramid  Texts  we  find  a  group  of  four  gods  with 
whom  the  deceased  is  closely  connected  in  the  Other  World  ; 

these    are  the   four   "Sons  of  Horus  "  (nOO^^v^    whose 

names  are  given  in  the  following  order  : — Hep   x  [|^  ^^' 

Tuamutef  ^"^n   ^  >  Amset  (j^^^z^n-:^,  and  Qebh- 

senuf  ^J  I  jy  H|o"^''l^^.~     The  deceased  is  called  their 
"  father."^      His  two  arms  were  identified  with  Hep  and 

1  For  the  hieratic  text  from  which  this  extract  is  taken  see  Birch, 
Sekct  Papyri,  Plates  20  ff.  and  134  ff. ;  see  also  Maspero,  Hynine  au  Nil, 
public  et  tradiiit  d'apres  les  deux  textes  du  Musee  Britannique,  Paris,  1868, 
4to.  See  also  Prof.  Maspero's  new  edition  published  in  Cairo,  4to,  19 12 
{Bibliotheque  d'J^tude,  tom.  V). 

2  Pyramid  of  Unas,  1.  219;  Pyramid  of  Teta,  11.  60,  286;  Pyramid  of 
Pepi  I,  11.  444,  593,  etc. 

^  Pyramid  of  Pepi  I,  1.  593. 


192  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

Tuamutef,  and  his  two  legs  with  Amset  and  Qebhsenuf;^ 
and  when  he  entered  into  the  Sekhet-Aaru  they  accom- 
panied him  as  guides,  and  went  in  with  him  two  on  each 
side.^  They  took  away  all  hunger  and  thirst  from  him,^ 
they  gave  him  life  in  heaven  and  protected  it  when  given,* 
and  they  brought  to  him  from  the  Lake  of  Khemta  the 
boat  of  the  eye  of  Khnemu.^     In   one  passage  they  are 

called  the  "  four  Khiis  of  Horus  "  ^  =  ^  (]  °  ^ 
'^^'^^j'^^ /wwvA  ^j^^,fi  and  originally  they  represented  the 
Four  Horus  gods,  who  held  up  the  four  pillars  which 
supported  the  sky,  T 1 1  |  ,  or  their  father  Horus.  Each  was 
supposed  to  be  lord  of  one  of  the  quarters  of  the  world,  and 
finally  became  the  god  of  one  of  the  cardinal  points.  Hep 
represented  the  north,  Tuamutef  the  east,  Amset  the  south, 
and  Qebhsenuf  the  west.  The  Egyptians  were  in  the 
habit  of  embalming  the  intestines  of  the  body  separately,  and 
they  placed  them  in  four  jars,  each  of  which  was  under  the 
protection  of  one  of  the  children  of  Horus,  i.e.,  under  the 
care  of  one  of  the  gods  of  the  four  quarters  of  the  earth. 
The  god  of  the  north  protected  the  small  viscera,  the 
god  of  the  east  the  heart  and  lungs,  the  god  of  the  south 
the  stomach  and  large  intestines,  and  the  god  of  the  west 
the  liver  and  gall-bladder.  With  these  four  gods  four 
goddesses  were  associated,  viz.,  Nephthys,  Neith,  Isis,  and 
Selk  or  Serq. 

Connected  with  the  god  Horus  are  a  number  of  mytho- 
logical  beings   called    Heru  shemsu"^  ^^^^^^, 

who  appear  already  in  the  pyramid  of  Unas  in  connection 
with  Horus  and  Set  in  the  ceremony  of  purifying  and 
"opening  the  mouth  "  ;  and  in  the  pyramid  of  Pepi  I  it  is 
they    who    wash    the    king   and    who    recite    for    him    the 

^  Recueil  de  Travaux,  t.  Ill,  p.  905  (11.  219  f.). 

2  Ibid.,  t.  VII,  p.  150  (II.  261-63). 

3  Ibid.,  t.  V,  p.  10  (11.  59  ff.). 

'   Pn^f     //-•^•,  t.  VIII,  p.  91  (1.  593). 

6  Ibid.,  t.  VII.  p.  167  (1.  444). 
«  Ibid.,  t.  VII,  p.  150  (1.  261). 

7  Ibid.,  t.  Ill,  p.  182  (1.  17). 


The  Gods  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead         193 

"  Chapter  of  those  who  come  forth,"  and  the  "  [Chapter  of] 
those  who  ascend."  ^ 

In  the  Judgment  Scene  in  the  Book  of  the  Dead, 
grouped  round  the  pan  of  the  balance,  which  contains  the 
heart  of  the  deceased  (see  Plate  III),  are  three  beings  in 
human  form,  who  bear  the  names  Shai,  Renenet,  and 
Meskhenet. 

Shai  T^T^T  '^^  [1  [1  Jj,  is  the  personification  of  Fate,  and 

Renenet  ^^^ww'^J),  of  Fortune;    these  names  are  usually 

found  coupled.  Shai  and  Renenet  are  said  to  be  in  the 
hands  of  Thoth,  the  divine  intelligence  of  the  gods  ;  and 
Rameses  II  boasts  that  he  himself  is  "lord  of  Shai  and 
creator  of  Renenet."^  Shai  was  originally  the  deity  who 
"  fated  "  what  should  happen  to  a  man,  and  Renenet,  as  may 
be  seen  from  the  Pyramid  Texts, ^  was  the  goddess  of 
plenty,  good  fortune,  and  the  like  ;  subsequently  no 
distinction  was  made  between  these  deities  and  the  abstract 
ideas  which  they  represented.  In  the  Papyrus  of  Ani, 
Shai  stands  by  himself  near  the  pillar  of  the  Balance,  and 
Renenet  is  accompanied  by  Meskhenet,  who  acted  as 
midwife  and  presided  over  the  birth-chamber.  In  the 
story  of  the  birth  of  the  three  sons  of  Ra,  as  related  in 
the    Westcar    Papyrus,    we    find    the   goddess   Meskhenet 

fn    1  jj    mentioned  with   I  sis,  Nephthys,  Heqet,  and 

the  god  Khnemu  as  assisting  at  the  birth  of  children. 
Disguised  in  human  forms,  the  four  goddesses  go  to  the 
house  of  Ra-user,  and,  because  they  have  a  knowledge  of 
the  art  of  midwifery,  they  are  admitted  to  the  chamber 
where  the  children  are  to  be  born  ;  I  sis  stands  before  the 
woman,  Nephthys  behind  her,  and  Heqet  accelerates  the 
birth.  When  the  child  is  born  Meskhenet  comes  and 
looking  upon  him  says :  "  A  king  ;   he  shall  rule  throughout 

(    Q  l|l|    I  ,  etc.     Recueil  de  Travaux,  t.  VII,  p.  170  (1.  463). 

-  See  Maspero,  Romans  et  Poesies  dii  Papyrus  Harris^  No.  500,  Paris, 
1879,  P-  27. 

^  Pyramid  of  Unas,  1.  564. 

VOL.  I.  O 


194  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

"  this  land.  May  Khnemu  give  health  and  strength  to  his 
♦'  body."i 

The  god  Amen  j^  |,  his  wife  Mut  ^-|,  and 

their  son   Khensu  I  3\  have  nothing  whatever  to  do 

with  the  Book  of  the  Dead  ;  but  Amen,  the  first  member 
of  this  great  Theban  triad,  must  be  mentioned  in  connection 
with  the  other  gods,  because  he  was  usually  identified  with 
one  or  more  of  them.  The  name  Amen  means  the  "  hidden, " 
and  seems  to  refer  to  the  mysterious  and  unknown  power 
that  causes  conception  in  women  and  animals  ;  one  of  his 
symbols  is  the  belly  of  a  pregnant  woman.  Amen  is  a  very 
ancient  god,  and  is  mentioned  with  Ament  in  the  Pyramid 
Texts,  but  his  cult  did  not  assume  any  great  importance  at 
Thebes  until  the  Xllth  dynasty,  when  a  large  temple  was 
built  in  his  honour  at  Karnak.  From  that  time  until  the 
close  of  the  XVIIth  dynasty,  Amen  was  the  chief  god  of 
Thebes  and  nothing  more.  When,  however,  the  last  kings 
of  the  XVIIth  dynasty  had  succeeded  in  expelling  the 
Hyksos  and  had  delivered  the  country  from  the  yoke  of 
the  foreigner,  their  god  assumed  an  importance  hitherto 
unknown,  and  his  priests  endeavoured  to  make  his  worship 
the  first  in  the  land.  But  Amen  was  never  regarded 
throughout  the  entire  country  as  its  chief  god,  although  his 
votaries  called  him  the  King  of  the  gods.  Speaking 
generally,  in  the  time  of  the  XVIIIth  dynasty  and  onwards 
the  god  was  the  personification  of  the  mysterious  creating 
and  sustaining  power  of  the  universe,  which  in  a  material 
form  was  typified  by  the  sun.  His  name  was  changed  to 
Amen-Ra,  and  little  by  little  all  the  attributes  of  the  old 
gods  of  Egypt  were  ascribed  to  him,  and  the  titles  which 
among  western  nations  are  given  to  God  were  added  to 
those  powers  which  Amen  had  usurped.  The  following 
extracts  from  a  fine  hymn  ^  illustrate  the  views  of  the 
priesthood  of  Amen-Ra  concerning  their  god  : — 

T  /ww>A    lU       O  \\       T  Awwv     1   1    I    I    I    _B^;i^  ^AAW^  <==> 

Papyrus  IVes/car,  Berlin,  1890,  Bl.  10,  11.  13,  14. 

2  See  Grebaut,  Jlyvme  a  Amman- Ra,  Paris,    1S74  ;   and  Wiedemann, 
Die  Religion,  pp.  64  ff. 


The  Gods  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead         195 

"  Adoration  to  thee,  O  Amen-Ra,  the  Bull  in  Anu 
(Heliopolis),  the  ruler  of  all  the  gods,  the  beautiful 
and  beloved  god  who  givest  life  to  all.  Hail  to  thee, 
O  Amen-Ra,  lord  of  the  Throne  of  Egypt,  thou  dweller 
in  Thebes,  thou  Bull  of  thy  mother  that  livest  in  thy 
field,  that  extendest  thy  journeys  in  the  land  of  the  south, 
thou  lord  of  those  who  dwell  in  the  west,  thou  governor 
of  Punt,  thou  king  of  heaven  and  sovereign  of  the 
earth,  thou  lord  of  things  that  exist,  thou  stablisher 
of  creation,  thou  supporter  of  the  universe.  Thou 
art  one  in  thine  attributes  among  the  gods,  thou  beautiful 
Bull  of  the  company  of  the  gods,  thou  chief  of  all  the 
gods,  lord  of  Madt,  father  of  the  gods,  creator  of  men, 
maker  of  beasts  and  cattle,  lord  of  all  that  existeth, 
maker  of  the  staff  of  life,  creator  of  the  herbs  which 
ofive  life  to  beasts  and  cattle  ....  Thou  art  the 
creator  of  things  celestial  and  terrestial,  thou  illuminest 
the  universe  ....  The  gods  cast  themselves  at  thy 
feet  when  they  perceive  thee  ....  Hymns  of  praise 
be  to  thee,  O  Father  of  the  gods,   who  hast  spread  out 

the  heavens   and    laid    down    the  earth thou 

master  of  eternity  and  of  everlastingness.  .  .  .  Hail  to 
thee,  O  Ra,  lord  of  Madt,  thou  who  art  hidden  in  thy 
shrine,  lord  of  the  gods.  Thou  art  Khepera  in  thy  bark, 
and  when  thou  sendest  forth  the  word  the  gods  come 
into  being.  Thou  art  Temu,  the  maker  of  beings  which 
have  reason,  and  however  many  be  their  forms,  thou 
givest  them  life,  and  thou  dost  distinguish  the  shape  and 
stature  of  each  from  his  neighbour.  Thou  hearest  the 
prayer  of  the  afflicted,  and  thou  art  gracious  unto  him 
that  crieth  unto  thee  ;  thou  deliverest  the  feeble  one  from 
the  oppressor,  and  thou  judgest  between  the  strong  and 
the  weak  ....  The  Nile  riseth  at  thy  will  .  .  .  Thou 
Only  Form,  the  maker  of  all  that  is.  One  Only,  the 
creator  of  all  that  shall  be.  Mankind  hath  come  forth 
from  thine  eyes,  the  gods  have  come  into  being  from  thy 
mouth,  thou  makest  the  herbs  for  the  use  of  beasts  and 
cattle,  and  the  staff  of  life  for  the  need  of  man.  Thou 
givest  life  to  the  fish  of  the  stream  and  to  the  fowl  of  the 
air,  and  breath  unto  the  germ  in  the  e.gg  ;  thou  givest 
life  unto  the  grasshopper,  and  thou  makest  to  live  the 
wild  fowl  and  things  that  creep  and  things  that   fly  and 

o  2 


196  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

"  everything  that  belongeth  thereunto.  Thou  providest 
"  food  for  the  rats  in  their  holes  and  for  the  birds  that  sit 
"  among  the  branches  ....  thou  One,  thou  Only  One 
"  whose  arms  are  many.  All  men  and  all  creatures  adore 
"  thee,  and  praises  come  unto  thee  from  the  height  of 
"  heaven,  from  earth's  widest  space,  and  from  the  deepest 
"  depths  of  the  sea  ....  thou  One,  thou  Only  One  who 

"  hast  no  second whose  names  are  manifold  and 

"  innumerable." 

We   have    seen   above    that    amone    other    titles    the 


god  Amen  was   called  the   "One    One"  a '^  J|  '   hut 

the  addition  of  the  words  "  who  hast  no  second  "  "^^ 

is  remarkable  as  showing  that  the  Egyptians  had  already 
conceived  the  existence  of  a  god  who  had  no  like  or  equal, 
which  they  hesitated  not  to  proclaim  side  by  side  with 
their  descriptions  of  his  manifestations.  Looking  at  the 
Egyptian  words  in  their  simple  meaning,  it  is  pretty 
certain  that  when  the  Egyptians  declared  that  their  god 
was  One  and  that  he  had  no  second,  they  had  the 
same  ideas  as  the  Jews  and  Muhammadans  when  they 
proclaimed  their  God  to  be  "  One  "  ^  and  alone.  It  has 
been  urged  that  the  Egyptians  never  advanced  to  pure 
monotheism  because  they  never  succeeded  in  freeing 
themselves  from  the  belief  in  the  existence  of  other  gods, 
but  when  they  say  that  a  god  has  "  no  second,"  even 
though  they  mention  other  "  gods,"  it  is  quite  evident  that, 
like  the  Jews,  they  conceived  him  to  be  an  entirely 
different  being  from  the  beings  which,  for  the  want 
of  a  better  word,  or  because  these  possessed  superhuman 
attributes,  they  named  "gods." 

The  gods  above  enumerated  represent  the  powers  who 
were  the  guides  and  protectors  and  givers  of  life  and 
happiness  to  the  deceased  in  the  new  life,  but  from  the 
earliest  times  it  is  clear  that  the  Egyptians  imagined  the 
existence  of  other  powers  who  offered  opposition  to  the 
dead,  and  who  are  called  in  many  places  his  "enemies." 
Like    so    many    of  the    ancient  gods,   these   powers  were 

1  nnvi ,  Deut.  vi,  4.   Cp.  i"7n^p  liv  )''N  n^nSKn  t^^n  mn*!  ""a, 

Deut.  iv,  35 ;   and  n^Tih^_  )••«  ""n^t  TliT  p^l,   Isaiah  xlv,  5. 


The  Gods  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead         197 

originally  certain  forces  of  nature,  which  were  believed  to 
be  opposed  to  those  that  were  regarded  as  beneficent 
to  man,  as  for  example  darkness  to  light,  and  night  to 
day  ;  with  darkness  and  night  were  also  associated  the 
powers  which  contributed  in  any  way  to  obscure  the  light 
of  the  sun  or  to  prevent  his  shining.  But  since  the 
deceased  was  identified  with  Osiris  and  Ra,  and  their 
accompanying  gods,  the  enemies  of  the  one  became  the 
enemies  of  the  other,  and  the  welfare  of  the  one  was 
the  welfare  of  the  other.  When  the  Egyptians  personified 
the  beneficent  powers  of  nature,  that  is  say,  their  gods, 
they  conceived  them  in  their  own  images  ;  but  when 
they  personified  the  destroying  powers,  or  opposing  powers, 
they  gave  to  them  the  shapes  of  noxious  animals  and 
reptiles,  such  as  snakes  and  scorpions.  As  time  went  on, 
the  moral  ideas  of  good  and  right  were  attributed  to  the 
former,  and  evil  and  wickedness  to  the  latter.  The  first 
personifications  of  Day  and  Night,  or  Light  and  Darkness, 
were  Horus  and  Set,  and  in  the  combat — the  prototype  of 
the  subsequent  legends  of  Marduk  and  Tiamat,  Bel  and 
the  Dragon,  St.  George  and  the  Dragon,  and  many  others 
— which  took  place  between  them,  Horus  was  always  the 
victor. 

Now,  though  the  deceased  was  identified  with  Osiris 
or  Ra,  the  victory  that  Horus  gained  over  Set  only 
benefited  the  spiritual  body  which  dwelt  in  heaven,  and 
did  not  preserve  the  natural  body  which  lay  in  the 
tomb.  The  principal  enemy  of  the  natural  body  was  the 
worm,  and  from  the  earliest  times  it  seems  that  a  huge 
worm  or  serpent  was  chosen  by  the  Egyptians  as  the 
type  of  the  powers  which  were  hostile  to  the  dead  and 
also  of  the  foe  against  whom  the  Sun-god  fought.  Already 
in  the  Pyramid  of  Unas  a  long  section  of  the  text  contains 
nothing  but  formulae,  the  recital  of  which  was  intended  to 
protect  the  deceased  from  various  kinds  of  snakes  and 
worms.  ^  These  are  exceedingly  ancient,  indeed  they  may 
safely  be  said  to  form  one  of  the  oldest  parts  of  the  funeral 
literature  of  the  Egyptians,  and  we  find  from  the  later 
editions  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead  and  certain  Coptic  works 
that  the  dread  of  the  serpent  as  the  emblem  of  physical  and 

^  Maspero,  Recueil  de  Travaux,  t.  Ill,  p.  220. 


198  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

moral  evil  existed  among  the  Egyptians  in  all  generations, 
and  that,  as  will  be  seen  later,  the  belief  in  a  limbo  filled 
with  snakes  swayed  their  minds  long  after  they  had  been 
converted  to  Christianity. 

The  charms  against  serpents  in  the  Pyramid  Texts  of 
the  Vth  and  Vlth  dynasties  have  their  equivalents  in  the 
XXXIst  and  XXXIIIrd  Chapters  of  the  Book  of  the 
Dead,  which  are  found  on  coffins  of  the  Xlth  and  Xllth 
dynasties  ;^  and  in  the  XVII I th  dynasty  we  find  vignettes 
in  which  the  deceased  is  depicted  in  the  act  of  spearing 
a  crocodile^  and  of  slaughtering  serpents.^  In  the  Theban 
and  Saite  Recensions  are  several  small  chapters*  the  recital 
of  which  drove  away  reptiles  :  and  of  these  the  most 
important  is  the  XXXIXth^  Chapter,  which  preserved 
the  deceased  from  the  attack  of  the  great  serpent  Aapef  or 

'^^P^P  I^^-  °  "^  °^  ^^mi'  ^vho  is  depicted  with 
knives  stuck  in  his  folds  )Mh-'''  In  the  period  of  the  later 
dynasties  a  service  was  performed  daily  in  the  temple  of 
Amen-Ra  at  Thebes  to  deliver  the  Sun-god  from  the 
assault  of  this  fiend,  and  on  each  occasion  it  was  accom- 
panied by  a  ceremony  in  which  a  waxen  figure  of  Aapep 
was  burnt  in  the  fire  ;  as  the  wax  melted,  so  the  power  of 
Aapep  was  destroyed.'''     Another  name  of  Aapep  was  Nak 

I,  who  was  pierced  by  the  lance  of  the  Eye  of 


Horus  and  made  to  vomit  what  he  had  swallowed.^ 

The  Judgment  Scene  in  the  Theban  Recension  of  the 
Book  of  the  Dead  reveals  the  belief  in  the  existence  of 
a  tri-formed  monster,  part  crocodile,  part  lion,  and  part 
hippopotamus,    whom     the     Egyptians     called     Am  -  mit 

1  Goodwin,  Aeg.  Zeitschrift^  1866,  p.   54;   see  also  Lepsius,   Aelteste 
Texte,  Bl.  35,  11.  i  ff. 

-  Naville,  Todtenbuch,  Bd.  I,  Bl.  44. 
»  Ibid.,  Bd.  I,  Bl.  46. 

4  I.e.,  Chapters  32,  34,  35,  36,  37,  38,  etc. 

5  For  the  text  see  Naville,  Todtenbuch,  Bd.  I,  Bl.  53;  and  Lepsius, 
Todtenbuch,  Bl.  18. 

*  See  Lanzone,  Dizionario,  p.  121. 

■^  The  service  for  the  Overthrowing  of  Apepi  is  printed  in  Archaeoiogia, 
Vol.  LII,  pp.  393-608. 

Gr^baut,  Bymne,  p.  10. 


The  Gods  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead         199 

l^C^''  ^"■^*'  "  ^^^  Eater  of  the  Dead,"  and 
who  lived  in  Amenta  ;  her  place  is  by  the  side  of  the 
scales  wherein  the  heart  is  weighed,  and  it  is  clear  that 
such  hearts  as  failed  to  balance  the  feather  of  Maat  were 
devoured  by  her.  In  one  papyrus  she  is  depicted  crouching 
by  the  side  of  a  lake.^     Other  types  of  evil  were  the  insect 

Apshai  M^T  ^|\  [] fl  W,"  confounded  in  later  times  with 

the   tortoise^  izxa*^^,   which   dies  as    Ra  lives;*   the 

crocodile  Sebak,  which  afterwards  became  identified  with 
Ra  ;  the  hippopotamus,  the  ass,  etc. 

The  Pyramid  Texts  afford  scanty  information  about  the 
fiends  and  devils  with  which  the  later  Egyptians  peopled 
certain  parts  of  the  Tuat,  wherein  the  night  sun  pursued 
his  course,  and  where  the  souls  of  the  dead  dwelt  ;  for  this 
we  must  turn  to  the  composition  entitled  the  "  Book  of  him 
that  is  in  the  Tuat,"  several  copies  of  which  have  come 
down  to  us  inscribed  upon  tombs,  coffins,  and  papyri  of  the 
XVIIith  and  following  dynasties.  The  Tuat  was  divided 
into  twelve  parts,  corresponding  to  the  twelve  hours  of  the 
night  ;  and  this  Book  professed  to  afford  to  the  deceased 
the  means  whereby  he  might  pass  through  them  success- 
fully. In  one  of  these  divisions,  which  was  under  the  rule 
of  the  god  Seker,  the  entrance  was  guarded  by  a  serpent 
on  four  legs  with  a  human  head,  and  within  were  a  serpent 
with  three  heads,  scorpions,^  vipers,  and  winged  monsters 
of  terrifying  aspect  ;  a  vast  desert  place  was  their  abode, 
and  seemingly  the  darkness  was  so  thick  there  that  it  might 
be  felt.  In  other  divisions  we  find  serpents  spitting  fire, 
lions,  crocodile-headed  gods,  a  serpent  that  devours  the 
dead,  a  huge  crocodile,  and  many  other  reptiles  of  divers 
shapes  and  forms. 

From  the  descriptions  which  accompany  the  scenes,  it 
is  evident  that  the  Tuat  was  regarded  by  the  Egyptians  of 
the   XVIIIth    dynasty    from    a   moral   as    well    as    from 

1  See  Chapter  CXXV. 

2  Naville,  Todienbuch,  Bd.  I,  Bl.  49. 
^  Lepsius,  Todtenlmch,  Bl.  17. 

*  T    ^   ^  ^  *^"     ^^^^^^^'  Todtenbuch,  Bd.  I,  Bl.  184. 
^  See  Maspero,  Les  Hypogees  Royaux  de  T/icbes,  p.  76. 


200  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

a  physical  point  of  view.^  Aapep,  the  emblem  of  evil, 
was  here  punished  and  overcome,  and  here  dwelt  the  souls 
of  the  wicked  and  the  righteous,  who  received  their  punish- 
ments or  rewards,  meted  out  to  them  by  the  decree  of  Ra 
and  his  company  of  gods.  The  chief  instruments  of  punish- 
ment employed  by  the  gods  were  fire  and  beasts  which 
devoured  the  souls  and  bodies  of  the  enemies  of  Ra ;  and 
we  may  see  from  the  literature  of  the  Copts,  or  Egyptians 
who  had  embraced  Christianity,  how  long  the  belief  in 
a  hell  of  fire  and  torturing  fiends  survived.  Thus  in  the 
Life  of  Abba  Shenuti,^  a  man  is  told  that  the  "executioners 
of  Amenti  will  not  show  compassion  upon  thy  wretched 
soul,"^  and  in  the  history  of  Pisentios,  a  Bishop  of  Coptos 
in  the  seventh  century  of  our  era,  we  have  a  series  of  details 
which  reflect  the  Tuat  of  the  ancient  Egyptians  in  a  remark- 
able manner.  The  bishop  having  taken  up  his  abode  in 
a  tomb  filled  with  mummies,  causes  one  of  them  to  tell  his 
history.^  After  saying  that  his  parents  were  Greeks  who 
worshipped  Poseidon,  he  states  that  when  he  was  dying, 
already  the  avenging  angels  came  about  him  with  iron 
knives  and  goads  as  sharp  as  spears,  which  they  thrust  into 
his  sides,  while  they  gnashed  their  teeth  at  him  ;  when  he 
opened  his  eyes,  he  saw  death  in  all  its  manifold  forms 
round  about  him  ;  and  at  that  moment  angels  without 
mercy  (rti^.rreXoc  ft  ^.e^^.I)  came  and  dragged  his 
wretched  soul  from  his  body,  and  tying  it  to  the  form  of 
a  black  horse  they  bore  it  away  to  Amenta  (eiULertx  = 

^^  '^l.       Next,    he    was    delivered     over     to    merciless 

tormentors,  who  tortured  him  in  a  place  where  there  were 
multitudes  of  savage  beasts  ;  and,  when  he  had  been  cast 
into  the  place  of  outer  darkness,  he  saw  a  ditch  more  than 
two  hundred  feet  deep  filled  with  reptiles,  each  of  which 
had  seven  heads,  and  all  their  bodies  were  covered  as  it 
were  with  scorpions.      Here  also  were  serpents,  the  very 

'  See  Lef^bure,  Book  of  Hades  {Records  of  the  Past,  \'ol.  X,  p.  84). 
'^  See   Amelineau,    Monuments  pour  servir  a  VHistoire  de    FEgypte 
Chretien ne,  p.  167. 

3  JULU    ce^^.•^"^.co    exeK^nr^H     nT^-XA-inuDpoc    ftxe 
ni2^HJULtjopicT-Hc  itye  ^.JULeit-f  • 

^  See  Amelineau,  Etude  sur  le  Christianisme  en  Egypte  au  Septihnie 
Sikle,  Paris,  1887,  P-  i47- 


The  Gods  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead    201 

sight  of  which  terrified  the  beholder,  and  to  one  of  them 
which  had  teeth  Hke  iron  stakes  was  the  wretched  man 
given  to  be  devoured  ;  for  five  days  in  each  week  the 
serpent  crushed  him  with  his  teeth,  but  on  the  Saturday 
and  Sunday  there  was  respite.  Another  picture  of  the 
torments  of  Hades  is  given  in  the  Martyrdom  of  Macarius 
of  Antioch,  wherein  the  Saint,  having  restored  to  Hfe  a  man 
who  had  been  dead  six  hours,  learned  that  when  he  was 
about  to  die  he  was  surrounded  by  fiends,  ^^.rt2iHKA.rtoc, 
some  of  whom  had  the  faces  of  dragons,  ft^o  ^2^.p^,I<:(J0^t , 
others  of  lions,  it^o  n  jul  juloooti,  others  of  crocodiles,  ft^o 
^eJULC^.^,  and  others  of  bears,  ft^o  ftX^.^OI.  They  tore 
his  soul  from  his  body  with  great  violence,  and  they  fied 
with  it  over  a  mighty  river  of  fire,  in  which  they  plunged  it 
to  a  depth  of  four  hundred  cubits  ;  then  they  took  it  out 
and  set  it  before  the  Judge  of  Truth,  jjl  iiiKpiTHC  JUL  julhi. 
After  hearing  the  sentence  of  the  Judge  the  fiends  took  it 
to  a  place  of  outer  darkness  where  no  light  came,  and  they 
cast  it  into  the  cold  where  there  was  o-nashinof  of  teeth. 
There  it  beheld  a  snake  which  never  slept,  qem"  it  ^.T 
ertKOT,  with  a  head  like  that  of  a  crocodile,  and  which  was 
surrounded  by  reptiles  which  cast  souls  before  it  to  be 
devoured,  epe  rti(5"^.T-qi  THpoT  ^^.TOTq  enrciT  n 
iti^lf-jfXH  ^inr^H  ijuuLoq  ;  when  the  snake's  mouth  was  full 
it  allowed  the  other  reptiles  to  eat,  and  though  they  rent 
the  soul  in  pieces  it  did  not  die.  After  this  the  soul  was 
carried  into  Amenta  for  ever,  ^.JULeIt'f"  cy<L  erte^.^  The 
martyr  Macarius  suffered  in  the  reign  of  Diocletian,  and  the 
MS.  from  which  the  above  extract  is  taken  was  copied  in 
the  year  of  the  Martyrs  634  =  a.d.  918.  Thus,  the  old 
heathen  ideas  of  the  Egyptian  Tuat  were  applied  to  the 
construction  of  the  Coptic  Hell. 

^  See    Hyvernat,    Les  Actes  des    Martyrs   de  rEgypte,    Paris,    1886, 
PP-  56,  57- 


202  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 


THE  PRINCIPAL  GEOGRAPHICAL 
AND  MYTHOLOGICAL  PLACES 
IN    THE    BOOK    OF   THE    DEAD 

Abtu     f  J  ^=^  ^  ^'    the    Abydos    of   the    Greeks 

(Strabo,  XVII,  i,  42),  and  the  e^cjOT  of  the  Copts,  was  the 
capital  of  the  eighth  nome  of  Upper  Egypt.  It  was  the 
seat  of  the  worship  of  Osiris  in  Upper  Egypt,  and  the 
god  was  believed  to  have  been  buried  there.  For  many 
centuries  its  priests  boasted  the  possession  of  the  head  of 
Osiris,  and  the  great  annual  miracle-play,  in  which  the 
sufferings,  death,  and  resurrection  of  Osiris  were  acted, 
drew  thousands  of  people  to  the  festival  from  every  part  of 
Egypt.  Local  tradition  made  the  sun  to  end  its  daily 
course  at  Abydos,  and  to  enter  into  the  Tuat  at  this  place 
through  a  "  gap  "  in  the  mountains  called  in  Egyptian /ty, 

-^  @  }     These  mountains  lay  near  to  the  town  ;  and  in 

the  Xllth  dynasty  it  was  believed  that  the  souls  of  the  dead 
made  their  way  into  the  Other  World  by  the  valley  which 
led  through  them  to  the  Great  Oasis,  where  some  placed 
the  Elysian  Fields.^  Under  the  New  Empire  the  tomb  of 
King  Khent  at  Abydos  was  identified  by  local  tradition  as 
the  tomb  of  Osiris,  and  it  became  the  object  of  pilgrimages 
from  every  part  of  Egypt.  Under  the  XXI I nd  dynasty 
the  cult  of  Osiris  declined,  and  the  town  never  regained 
the  importance  which  it  had  enjoyed  under  the  XVIIIth 
dynasty. 

Amenta   or   Amentet,  |^,  or  |^^.  was    originally 

the  place  where  the  sun  set,  but  subsequently  the  name 
was  applied  to  all  the  cemeteries  which  were  built  in  the 
stony  plateaus  and  mountains  on  the  western  bank  of  the 
Nile.  Some  believe  that  Amenta  was,  at  first,  the  name  of 
a  small  district,  without  either  funereal  or  mythological 
signification.  The  Christian  Egyptians,  or  Copts,  used  the 
word  Amenti  to  translate  the  Greek  word  Hades,  to  which 

'  See  Brugsch,  Z>ic/.  Giog.,  p.  227. 

2  See  Maspero,  Etudes  de  Mythologie^  t.  I,  p.  345 


Places  in  the  Book  of  the  Dead  203 

they  attributed  all  the  ideas  which  their  heathen  ancestors 
had  associated  with  the  Amenta  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead. 

Anu    I     ,  the  Heliopolis  of  the  Greeks  (Herodotus,  II, 


3,  7,  8,  9,  59,  93  ;  Strabo,  XVII,  i,  27  ff.),  was  the  capital 
of  the  thirteenth  nome  of  Lower  Egypt.  The  Hebrews 
called  it  On  (Genesis  xli,  45,  50  ;  xlvi,  20),  Aven  (Ezekiel 
XXX,  17),  and  Beth-Shemesh  (Jeremiah  xliii,  13)  ;  this  last 

name  is  an  exact  translation  of  the  Egyptian       ^   |  per  Ret, 

"  house  of  the  sun,"  which  was  also  a  designation  of  Anu. 
The  Copts  have  preserved  the  oldest  name  of  the  city 
under  the  form  CJOit.  A  Coptic  bishop  of  this  place  was 
present  at  the  Council  of  Ephesus.  The  city  of  Anu  seems 
to  have  become  associated  with  the  worship  of  the  sun  in 
prehistoric  times.  Already  in  the  Vth  dynasty  its  priest- 
hood had  succeeded  in  gaining  supremacy  for  their  religious 
views  and  beliefs  throughout  Egypt,  and  from  first  to  last  it 
maintained  its  position  as  the  chief  seat  of  the  cult  of  Ra. 
The  body  of  the  Aged  One,  a  name  of  Osiris,  reposed  in 
Anu,  and  there  dwelt  the  Eye  of  Osiris.  The  deceased 
made  his  way  to  Anu,  where  souls  were  joined  unto  bodies 
in  thousands,  and  where  the  blessed  dead  lived  on  celestial 
food  for  ever. 

An-rutf,  or  Naarutf  .A^IJ  ^  ©  '  \(1  ^  ^__  ®'  ^^^^ 
a  section  of  the  Tuat  of  Herakleopolis  ;  the  meaning  of  the 
name  is  "  the  place  where  nothing  groweth." 

An-tes  (?)  I  !^^'  an  unknown  locality  where  ||1,  the 
tower  of  a  Light-god  (?),  was  adored. 

Apu  (1  □  v^  ©,  the  Panopolis  of  the  Greeks  (Jlavoiv  WXts, 

Strabo,  XVII,  i,  41),  was  the  metropolis  of  the  ninth  nome 
of  Upper  Egypt,  and  the  seat  of  the  worship  of  the  god 

^pjj,  whose  name  is  variously  read   Amsi,    Khem,   and 

Menu.  In  ancient  days  it  was  famous  as  the  centre  for 
stone  cutting  and  linen  weaving,  and  the  latter  industry 
still  survives  among  the  modern  Coptic  population,  who, 
following  their  ancestors,  call  their  city  cyjULiJUL,  which  the 
Arabs  have  rendered  by  Akhmim. 


204  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

Akert  0  ,  a  common  name  for  the  abode  of  the 

dead. 

Bast   n  S,  more  fully  Pa-Bast,  or  Per-Bast       W^  ^' 

the  Bubastis  of  the  Greek  writers  (Herodotus,  II,  59,  137, 
156,  166;  Strabo,  XVII,  i,  27),  the  metropolis  of  the 
eighteenth  nome  of  Lower  Egypt,  and  the  seat  of  the 
worship  of  Bast,  a  goddess  who  was  identified  with  the  soul 

of  Isis,  ba  en  Ast  ^^^/wwvv  j  The  city  is  mentioned  in 

the  Bible  under  the  form  npi  "'D  (Ezekiel  xxx,  17),  Pi- 
beseth,  which  the  Copts  have  preserved  in  their  name  for 
the  city,  \K.o'x^i^(fT\ ;  the  Arabs  call  the  place  Tell  Bastah 

Het-benbent   \    ^  jw^J        (1  cr^i ,  the  name  given 

to  many  sun-shrines  in  Egypt  and  the  Sudan,  and  also  to 
one  of  the  places  in  the  Other  World  where  the  deceased 
dwelt. 

Het-Ptah-ka  8  LI,  the  sacred  name  of  the  city 

of  Memphis,  the  metropolis  of  the  first  nome  of  Lower 
Egypt ;  it  means  the  "  House  of  the  ka  of  Ptah,"  and  was 
probably  in  use  in  the  period  of  the    1st   dynasty.      Other 

names  for  Memphis  were  j  N  ^>  Aneb-hetchet,  "  the  city  of 
the    white    wall " ;    Men-nefer  1  A  ;    and    Kha-nefert 

/^AA^A^  0  era 

Kam-ur  ^^  T=rT,  a  name  given  to  the  district  of 

the  fourth  and  fifth  nomes  of  Upper  Egypt. 

Khemenu   |'||q(3  =  =^'   |I'|  ^^  @,  2>.,  the  city  of  the 

eight  great  cosmic  gods,  the  Hermopolis  of  the  Greek  writers 
CEpixoirokLTLKr)  ff)vkaKrj,  Strabo,  XVII,  I,  41),  was  the 
metropolis  of  the  fifteenth  nome  of  Upper  Egypt.  The  old 
Egyptian  name  for  the  city  is  preserved  in  its  Coptic  and 
Arabic  names,  cyjULOTrt  and  Eshmunen. 

Kher-aha     ^    Qy^  ©  ,    a  very  ancient  city  which  was 

situated  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Nile,  a  little  to  the  south 
of  Anu,  near  the  site  of  which   the   "  Babylon  of  Egypt " 


Places  in  the  Book  of  the  Dead  205 

(^^.^nrXcort  ftTe  ^hjuli,  the  Ba/3u\wv,  (f)povpLou  ipvfivov 
of  Strabo,  XVII,  i,  30)  was  built. 

Manu  — ^  r^/^  or  4  "^  '^j  is  the  name  given  to  the 
region  where  the  sun  sets,  which  was  believed  to  be  exactly- 
opposite  to  the  district  of  Bekha,    J  f^y^^'  where  he  rose  in 

the  east ;  Manu  is  a  synonym  of  west,  just  as  Bekha  is 
a  synonym  of  east.^ 

Nekhen    ^  ,  or    ®        ,  the  name  of  the  shrine  of  the 

goddess  Nekhebet,  which  is  supposed  to  have  been  near  to 
Nekheb,  the  capital  of  the  third  nome  of  Upper  Egypt  and 
the  Eileithyiaspolis  of  the  Greeks. 


Neter-khertet,  or  Khert  Neter, 


iTi     Ci  '^      C>     d 


1 


^  or     ,  , 

a  common  name  for  the  abode  of  the  dead  ;  it  means  the 
'*  divine  subterranean  place." 

Pe      ,  a  district  of  the  town  of  Per-Uatchet,  "^^T"^  ^, 

the    Buto  of  the  Greeks  (Bouro?,   Strabo,   XVII,    i,    18), 
which  was  situated  in  the  Delta. 


Per-Asar       ^     _^J\®>  "  House  of  Osiris,"  the  Busiris 

of  the  Greek  writers.  It  was  situated  in  the  Delta,  and 
was  the  centre  of  the  cult  of  Osiris  in  Lower  Egypt. 

Punt   ,^^  ^A^'  ^^^  tropical   district   which   lay  to   the 

south  and  east  of  Egypt,  and  which  included,  in  later  times, 
a  part  of  the  Arabian  peninsula  and  the  eastern  coast  of 
Africa  along  and  south  of  Somaliland. 

Ra-stau      ,     -(o-  ^^^  or  ^^  ~^  © ,  a  name  g^iven  to 

the  passages  in  the  tomb  which  lead  from  this  to  the  Other 
World  ;  originally  it  designated  the  cemetery  of  Sakkarah 
only,  and  its  god  was  Seker,  later  Seker-Asar. 

Sa  ~~'*~'^=^^®>    the     Sais    of    the    Greeks     (Sat?, 

Strabo,  XVII,  i,  23),  the  metropolis  of  the  fifth  nome  of 
Lower  Egypt,  and  the  seat  of  the  worship  of  the  goddess 
Neith. 

^  See    Brugsch,    Z>ic/.    Geog.,    pp.    199,    260 ;    Maspero,    Etudes  de 
Myihologie,  t.  I,  p.  332  ;  and  Aeg.  Zeitschrift,  1864,  pp.  73-76. 


2o6  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 


^^^^^^  m  ^©'°'  ®  ^c^®'  '^^  LetopoHsof 
the  Greeks,  and  capital  of  the  Letopolites  nome  (Strabo, 
XYII,   i,  30);  it  was  the  seat  of  the  worship  of  Heru-ur 

^.    rrt,   "  Horus  the  elder,"  and  one  of  the  most  important 

religious  centres  in  Egypt. 

Sekhet-Aanru  M,Z^  ^TiT'^W.'^®'  ^'•^•• 
"Field  of  the  Reeds,"  was  a  name  originally  given  to  the 
islands  in  the  Delta,  or  to  the  Oases,  where  the  souls  of  the 
dead  were  supposed  to  live.  Here  was  the  abode  of  the  god 
Osiris,  who  bestowed  estates  in  it  upon  those  who  had  been 
his  followers,  and  here  the  beatified  dead  led  a  new  existence 
and  regaled  themselves  upon  food  of  every  kind,  which  was 
eiven  to  them  in  abundance.  Accordinor  to  the  vionette  of 
the  CXth  Chapter  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead,  the  Sekhet- 
Aanru  is  the  third  division  of  the  Sekhet-hetepu,  or  "Fields 
of  Peace,"  which  have  been  compared  with  the  Elysian 
Fields  of  the  Greeks, 


Set  Amentet  c^^^C^,  ?>.,  "  the  mountain  of  the 

Underworld,"  a  common  name  of  the  cemetery,  which  was 
usually  situated  in  the  mountains  or  desert  on  the  western 
bank  of  the  Nile. 

Suten-henen  ,,^':ZC!^'^,  more  correctly  Hensu,  the 

metropolis  of  the  twentieth  nome  of  Upper  Egypt,  called 
by  the  Greeks  Herakleopolis  Magna  (Strabo,  XYII,  i,  35). 
The  Hebrews  mention  the  city  Hanes  (D3n,  Isaiah  xxx,  4) 

as  the  representative  of  Upper  Egypt,  and  in  Coptic  times 
it  was  still  of  considerable  size  and  importance  ;  the  Copts 
and  Arabs  have  preserved  the  ancient  name  of  the  city 
under  the  forms  ^itHC  and  j^U&U  A  Anas. 

Tanenet  '^vjill.^^^,  a  district  sacred  to  the  ofods 
Osiris  and  Ptah  ;  it  was  probably  situated  near  Memphis. 

Ta-tchesert  5^^=?  ^^  "^  '^,    i.e.,    the    Holy    Land,   a 
common  name  for  the  Other  World. 


Funeral  Ceremonies  207 

Tep  ,  a  district  of  the  town  Per-Uatchet       T^'^, 

the  Buto  of  the  Greeks  (Strabo,   XVII,   i,    18),  which  was 
situated  in  the  Deha. 

Tetu-t    jMi  <c:^3  v\ '^,    a    name    given    both    to    the 

metropolis  ^  of  the  ninth  nome  and  to  the  metropolis  ^  of 
the  sixteenth  nome  of  Lower  Egypt. 

Tuat  ^K.,       ,  a  common  name  for  the  Other  World. 


FUNERAL    CEREMONIES 

In  illustration  of  the  ceremonies  that  accompanied  the 
burial  of  the  dead  the  reader  will  find  extracts  from  different 
texts  printed  in  the  description  of  Plate  V.  To  these  may- 
be added  an  extract  from  the  great  Liturgy  of  Funerary 
Offerings  which  was  in  vogue  in  the  Vth  and  Vlth  dynasties, 
and  which  commemorated  the  ceremonies  that  were 
performed  for  the  god  Osiris.  It  is  to  be  noticed  how 
closely  the  deceased  is  identified  with  Osiris,  the  type  of 
incorruptibility.  Osiris  takes  upon  himself  "  all  that  is 
hateful "  in  the  dead  :  that  is,  he  accepts  the  burden  of  his 
sins  ;  and  the  dead  is  purified  by  the  typical  sprinkling  of 
water. 

Throughout  the  ceremony,  the  Eye  of  Horus,^  which  is 
represented  by  various  substances,  plays  a  prominent  part, 
for  it  is  that  which  gave  life  to  the  heart  of  Osiris,  and  it 
revivified  the  dead  also.  That  portion  of  the  ceremony 
which  was  believed  to  procure  the  unlocking  of  the  jaws 
and  the  opening  of  the  mouth  of  the  deceased,  or  of  the 
statue  which  sometimes  represented  him,  was  performed 
after  the  purification  by  water  and  incense  had  been  effected ; 

^  I.e.,  ri  J)  ®  '  Pa-Asar,  or  Per-Asar,  the  Busiris  of  the  Greeks. 


^  -^•^•'  b^^"^^-^  ]\]\       «  '  B^""^b-Tett,  the  Mendes  of  the  Greeks. 

"  On  the  Eyes  of  Horus,  see  Lefebure,  Ze  Mythe  Osirien — Les  Yeux 
d'Horus,  Paris,  1874  ;  and  Grebaut,  Les  deux  yeux  du  Disque  Solaire 
{Recueil  de  Travaux,  t.  I,  pp.  72,  87,  11 2-13 1). 


2o8  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

and  hereby  was  he  enabled  to  partake  of  the  meat  and 
drink  offerings,  whereof  the  friends  and  relatives  also 
partook,  in  order  that  they  might  cement  and  seal  their 
mystic  union  with  the  dead  and  with  the  god  with  whom  he 
was  identified. 

Certain  formulae  were  directed  to  be  repeated  four 
times  :  a  direction  which  takes  us  back  to  the  time  when 
the  Egyptians  first  divided  the  world  into  four  parts, 
each  corresponding  to  one  of  the  four  pillars  which  held 
up  the  sky,  that  is  to  say,  to  one  of  the  four  cardinal 
points,  East,  South,  West,  and  North,  presided  over  by 
a  Horus-god.  The  deceased  sought  to  obtain  the  assistance 
of  each  of  the  Horus-gods,  and  to  have  the  right  to  roam 
about  in  his  district ;  hence  the  formula  was  repeated  four 
times.  Originally  four  animals  or  four  geese  were  sacri- 
ficed, one  to  each  god,  but  subsequendy  East  and  North, 
and  West  and  South,  were  paired,  and  two  bulls  (or  birds) 
only  were  sacrificed,  one  of  which  was  called  the  Bull  of 
the  North, 1  and  the  other  the  Bull  of  the  South.  The 
custom  of  four-fold  repetition  continued  to  the  Ptolemaic 
times  and   even  later.     The  priest  whose  official  tide  was 

kher  keb,   |/I\   J^,    recited    the    prayers    in    the    Tuat 
^'       '     '  cr^  ^  "^  of  the  tomb,  and  the  sem  or  scfeui  priest 
%,  presented  the  prescribed  offerings.^ 

I.  Osiris,    everything    that    is    hateful    of   X^    hath    been 
carried  away  for  thee  ; 

Here  sprinkle  water. 

that  evil  which  was  spoken  in  his  name  Thoth  hath 
advanced  and  carried  it  to  Osiris.  I  have  brought  the 
evil  which  was  spoken  in  the  name  of  X,  and  I  have 
placed  it  in  the  palm  of  thy  hand. 

^  This  subject  has  been  lucidly  discussed  by  Maspero,  Recueil  de 
Travaux,  t.  XII,  pp.  78,  79. 

2  For  the  text  and  translations,  see  Schiapare Hi,  //  Libro  dei  Funerali, 
Rome,  1881-90  ;  Maspero,  Reauil  de  Travaux,  t.  Ill,  pp.  179  ft".  ;  Sethe, 
Fyramidentexte,  Vol.  I  ;  Budge,  Liturgy  of  Funerary  Offerings,  London, 
1909;  Diimichen,  Der  Grabpalast,  Leipzig,  1884,  1885. 

*  X  =  the  deceased. 


Funeral  Ceremonies  209 

Recite  four  times. 

The  fluid  of  life  shall  not  be  destroyed  in  thee,  and 
thou  shalt  not  be  destroyed  in  it. 

Let  him  that  advanceth  advance  with  his  Ka. 
Horus  advanceth  with  his  Ka. 
Set  advanceth  with  his  Ka. 
Thoth  advanceth  with  his  Ka. 

Recite  four  times  and  burn  incense. 

Sep  advanceth  with  his  Ka. 
Osiris  advanceth  with  his  Ka. 
Khent-ariti  advanceth  with  his  Ka. 

Thy  Tet  u  (backbone)  shall  advance  with  thy  Ka. 

Hail,  X  The  arm  of  thy  Ka  is  before  thee. 

Hail,  X  The  arm  of  thy  Ka  is  behind  thee. 

Hail,  X  The  leg  of  thy  Ka  is  before  thee. 

Hail,  X  The  leg  of  thy  Ka  is  behind  thee. 

Osiris,  I  have  given  unto  thee  the  Eye  of  Horus, 
and  thy  face  is  filled  therewith,  and  the  perfume  of  the 
Eye  of  Horus  is  to  thee. 

This  libation  is  for  thee,  Osiris,  this  libation  is  for 
thee,  Osiris  X,  coming  forth 

Here  pour  out  from  a  vessel  water  in  which 
two  grains  of  incense  have  been  dissolved. 

before  thy  son,  coming  forth  before  Horus.  I  have 
come.  I  have  brought  unto  thee  the  Eye  of  Horus, 
that  thy  heart  may  be  refreshed  thereby.  I  have 
brought  it  unto  thee  [under]  thy  sandals,  and  I  have 
presented  unto  thee  the  efflux  which  cometh  forth  from 
thee.     There  shall  be  no  stoppage  to  thy  heart  with  it, 

Recite  four  times. 

and  there  shall  be  a  coming  forth  to  thee  [of  offerings] 
through  the  word  which  is  spoken,  there  shall  be 
a  coming  forth  to  thee  [of  offerings]  through  the  word 
which  is  spoken. 

H.  [Cleansing  by]  Semman  !     [Cleansing  by]  Semman  ! 
Open  thy  mouth,  O  X, 

Here  offer  five  grains  of  Nekheb  incense 
from  the  city  of  Nekheb. 

VOL.    I.  P 


2IO  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

and  taste  thereof  in  the  halls  of  the  god.  Semman  is 
an  emission  of  Horus.  Semman  is  an  emission  of  Set. 
Semman  is  the  stablisher  of  the  heart  of  the  two 
Horus  gods. 

Recite  four  times. 

III.  Thou  art  cleansed  with  natron,  and  art  like  unto  the 
Followers  of  Horus.  Thou  art  purified  with  natron, 
and  Horus  is  purified  with  natron,  thou  art  purified 
with  natron,  and  Set  is  purified  with  natron. 

Here  offer  five  grains  of  natron  of  the  North 
from  Shetpet. 

IV.  Thou  art  purified  with  natron,  and  Thoth  is  purified 
with  natron.  Thou  art  purified  with  natron,  and  Sep 
is  purified  with  natron.  Thou  art  purified  with  natron 
and  thou  art  established  among  them  [i.e.,  the  gods). 
Thy  mouth  is  like  the  mouth  of  a  sucking  calf  on  the 
day  of  its  birth. 

V.  Thou  art   purified   with   natron,  and    Horus  is  purified 

with  natron.  Thou  art  purified  with  natron,  and  Set 
is  purified  with  natron.     Thou  art  purified  with  natron, 

Here  offer  one  grain  of  natron. 

and  Thoth  is  purified  with  natron.  Thou  art  purified 
with  natron,  and  Sep  is  purified  with  natron.  Thou 
art  purified  with  natron,  and  thy  Ka  is  purified  with 
natron. 

Thou  art  purified  with  natron  [Recite  four  times], 
O  thou  who  art  established  among  thy  brethren  the 
gods.  Thy  head  is  purified  for  thee  with  natron,  and 
thy  bones  have  been  thoroughly  cleansed  for  thee,  and 
thou  art  filled  with  that  which  belongeth  to  thee. 
Osiris,  I  have  given  unto  thee  the  Eye  of  Horus,  and 
thy  face  is  filled  therewith,  and  the  odour  thereof 
[is  spread  abroad]. 

VI.  Osiris  X,  thy  two  jaw-bones  which  were  separated  have 
been  established. 

Here  present  the  Peseshkef  ^ . 


Funeral  Ceremonies  211 

VII.  Osiris  X,  the  two  gods  (Horus  and  Set)  have  opened 
for  thee  thy  mouth. 

Here  present  the  two  iron  instruments  "^^ 
of  the  South  and  North. 

VIII.  Osiris  X,  the  Eye  of  Horus  hath  been  presented  unto 
thee,  and  with  it  the  god  passeth  ;  I  have  brought  it 
unto  thee,  place  it  in  thy  mouth. 

Here  offer  cheese  of  the  South  and  cheese 
of  the  North. 

IX.  Osiris  X,  the  nipple  cakes  of  Osiris  are  presented  unto 
thee,  the  nipple  of  the  breast  of  Horus,  thou  takest 
into  thy  mouth  ; 

Here  offer  a  small  vessel  of  milk. 

and  the  nipple  of  the  breast  of  thy  sister  Isis  ;  the 
emission  from  thy  mother  hast  thou  taken  possession 
of  for  thy  mouth. 

Here  offer  a  jug  of  whey. 

X.  This   libation  is   for  thee,    Osiris  ;    this  libation   is  for 

thee,  Osiris  X, 

Here  offer  clean  cold  water  of  the  North. 

coming  forth  before  thy  son,  coming  forth  before 
Horus.  I  have  come,  and  I  have  brought  unto  thee 
the  Eye  of  Horus,  that  thy  heart  may  be  refreshed 
therewith.  I  have  brought  it  and  [set]  it  under  thy 
sandals.  I  have  presented  unto  thee  that  which 
floweth  from  thee.  There  shall  be  no  stoppage  to 
thy  heart  whilst  it  is  with  thee,  [Recite  four  times] 
and  there  shall  be  a  coming  forth  to  thee  [of  offerings] 
through  the  word  which  is  spoken. 

XI.  [That  which  cometh  forth]  from  the  two  Eyes  of 
Horus,  the  White  and  the  Black,  thou  hast  seized, 
and  when  [these  emissions]  are  in  front  of  thee  they 
illumine  thy  face. 

Here  offer  two  jugs  of  wine,  one  black  and 
one  white. 

XII.  Day  hath  made  an  offering  unto  thee  in  the  sky; 
the  South  and  the  North  have  caused  an  offering  to 


212  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

be  made  unto  thee.  Night  hath  made  an  offering 
unto  thee  in  the  sky  ;  the  North  and  the  South  have 
caused  an  offering  to  be  made  unto  thee.  An  offering 
hath  been  made  unto  thee,  thou  seest  the  offering,  thou 
hearest  thereof  There  is  an  offering  before  thee,  and 
an  offering  behind  thee  ;  there  is  an  offering  with  thee. 

Here  offer  a  cake  for  the  journey. 

XIII.  Osiris  X,  the  white  teeth  of  Horus  are  presented 
unto  thee  so  that  they  may  fill  thy  mouth. 

Here  offer  five  bunches  of  onions,  and  recite 
four  times  The  King  giveth  an  offering  to  the 
Ka  of  X. 

XIV.  Osiris  X,  the  Eye  of  Horus  is  presented  unto  thee, 
the  bread  which  thou  eatest. 

Here  offer  the  Uten  cake. 

XV.  Osiris  X,  the  Eye  of  Horus  is  presented  unto  thee. 
It  hath  been  snatched  from  the  hand  of  Set,  and  thou 
hast  taken  possession  of  it 

Here  offer  a  white  jug  containing  two 
measures  of  wine. 

for  thy  mouth,  and  thou  hast  opened  thy  mouth 
therewith. 

XVI.  Osiris  X,  thy  mouth  is  opened  by  that  which  floweth 
from  thee. 

Here  offer  a  black  jug  containing  two 
measures  of  wine. 

XVII.  Osiris  X,  there  hath  been  presented  unto  thee  that 
which  was  pressed  out  from  thee,  that  which  hath 
come  forth  from  thee. 

Here  offer  a  black  jug  containing  one 
measure  of  beer. 

XVI  Ia.  O  Ra,  may  every  kind  of  adoration  which  is  made 
to  thee  in  heaven  be  made  to  X,  and  may  everything 
offered  to  thee  be  offered  to  the  Ka  of  X,  and  may 
every  offering  made  to  him  be,  at  the  same  time,  made 
to  thee. 


Funeral  Ceremonies  213 

Here  offer  the  holy  table  of  offerings. 

XVIII.  [Osiris]  X,  the  Eye  of  Horus  is  presented  unto 
thee  for  thee  to  taste. 

Here  offer  a  Tept  cake. 

XIX.  The  darkness  becometh  dense,  and  more  dense. 

Here  offer  an  Ah  cake. 

XX.  [Osiris]  X,  the  Eye  of  Horus  is  presented  unto  thee 
to  embrace  thee. 

Here  offer  a  breast. 

XXI.  [Osiris]  X,  the  Eye  of  Osiris,  which  was  dehvered 
from  Set,  and  was  rescued  for  thee,  is  presented  unto 
thee,  and  thou  dost  open  thy  mouth  with  it. 

Here  offer  a  white  vessel  containing  one 
measure  of  wine. 

XXII.  [Osiris]  X,  what  was  pressed  out  and  came  forth 
from  Osiris  is  presented  unto  thee. 

Here  offer  a  black  vessel   containing  one 
measure  of  beer. 

XXIII.  [Osiris]  X,  the  Eye  of  Horus,  which  was  rescued 
for  thee,  is  presented  unto  thee  ;  there  is  no  iron 
therein,  it  belongeth  unto  thee. 

Here  offer  an   iron   vessel  containing  one 
measure  of  beer. 

XXIV.  [Osiris]  X,  the  Eye  of  Horus  is  presented  unto 
thee,  that  thou  mayest  be  filled  therewith. 

Here  offer  a  vessel  containing  one  measure 
of  beer. 

XXV.  Osiris  X,  I  have  filled  thine  eye  with  metchet  oil. 

Recite    four  times,   and   present   Seth-heb 
unguent. 

XXVI.  Osiris  X,  what  hath  been  pressed  out  of  thy  face 
is  presented  unto  thee. 

Here  offer  Heken  unguent. 

XXVII.  Osiris  X,  the  Eye  of  Horus  is  presented  unto 
thee,  and  Set  is  weakened  thereby. 


214  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

Here  offer  ajar  of  bitumen. 

XXVIII.  Osiris  X,  the  Eye  of  Horus  is  presented  unto 
thee,  that  it  may  unite  with  thee. 

Here  offer  a  jar  of  Neshmen  unguent. 

XXIX.  Osiris  X,  the  Eye  of  Horus  is  presented  unto  thee, 
that  the  gods  may  be  brought  unto  thee. 

Here  offer  ajar  of  Tuatu  unguent. 

XXX.  O  ye  Oils,  ye  Oils,  which  are  on  the  forehead  of 
Horus  [Say  three  times],  set  yourselves  on  the  fore- 
head of  X,  and  make  him  to  smell  sweet  through  you. 

Here  offer  cedar  oil  of  the  finest  quality. 

Let  him  become  a  Khu  (Spirit)  through  you.  Give 
him  power  over  his  body,  and  let  him  open  his  eyes  ; 
let  all  the  Spirits  see  him,  and  let  them  all  hear  his 
name. 

XXXI.  Behold,  Osiris  X,  the  Eye  of  Horus  is  brought  to 
thee,  it  hath  been  seized  on  thy  behalf  that  it  may  be 
before  thee. 

Here  offer  the  finest  Libyan  oil  (Thehenu). 

XXXII.  Osiris  X,  with  the  Eye  of  Horus  thine  eyes  are 
painted,  that  they  may  be  healthy  in  thy  face. 

Recite  four  times,  and  offer  a  bag  of  copper 
eye  paint,  and  one  bag  of  stibium  eye-paint. 

XXXIII.  Watch  in  peace,  Taat  watcheth  in  peace,  she 
watcheth 

Here  offer  two  swathings. 

in  peace.  The  Eye  of  Horus  in  Tep  (Buto)  is  in 
peace.  The  Eye  of  Horus  in  the  temple  of  Neith 
[in  Sais]  is  in  peace.  Receive  thou  the  milk-white, 
bleached  swathings  of  the  goddess  Ura.  O  swathings, 
make  Egypt  to  submit  to  X  even  as  it  doth  to  Horus, 
make  Egypt  to  fear  X  even  as  it  feareth  Set.  Be  ye 
before  X  as  god.  Open  a  way  for  him  at  the  head  of 
the  Spirits,  let  him  stand  at  their  head.  Come  forward, 
O   Anpu    Khenti   Amenti,   forward,   to    the  Osiris  X. 


Funeral  Ceremonies  215 

Let  him  advance,  let  him  advance  with  his  Ka,  for 
Horus  advanceth  with  his  Ka,  and  Set  advanceth  with 
his  Ka. 

Here  burn  incense. 

As  Thoth  advanceth  with  his  Ka,  and  Sep  with  his  Ka, 
and  Osiris  with  his  Ka,  and  Khenti-ariti  with  his  Ka, 
so  shall  thy  Tet  J  advance  with  thy  Ka. 

XXXIV.  Thoth  hath  returned  bringing  the  Eye  of  Horus, 
and  he  hath  appeared  therewith  ; 

Here  offer  a  table  of  offerings. 

he  hath  given  the  Eye  of  Horus,  and  he  is  content 
therewith. 

Here  one  shall  enter  with  the  Royal  offering. 

XXXV.  Osiris   X,   the   Eye  of  Horus  is  presented   unto 
thee,  and  he  is  content. 

Here  present  the  Royal  offering  twice. 

XXXVI.  Osiris  X,  the  Eye  of  Horus  is  presented  unto 
thee,  and  he  is  content. 

Here  present  two  tables  of  offerings  in  the 
Usekh  Hall. 

Here  say :  Thou  hast  made  it  to   be   under 

THEE. 

Here  shall  the  assistants  sit  down  by  the 
royal  offerings. 

XXXVII.  Osiris  X,  the  Eye  of  Horus  is  presented  unto 
thee,  it  approacheth  thy  mouth. 

Here  present  a  cake  and  a  breadcake. 

XXXVIII.  Osiris  X,  the  Eye  of  Horus  is  presented  unto 
thee,  protecting 

Here  offer  one  Tut  cake. 

The  above  extract  will  give  the  reader  an  idea  of  the 
general  character  of  the  Liturgy  of  Funerary  Offerings. 
The  priest  presented  a  very  large  number  of  offerings,  one 
at  a  time,  and  as  he  did  so  he  pronounced  a  formula  in 
which  there  was  either  some  obscure  allusion  to  the  object 


2i6  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

which  he  was  about  to  present,  or  some  play  upon  words. 
Besides  the  offerings  already  enumerated  there  were  given  : 
a  Rethu  cake,  a  vessel  of  Tchesert  drink,  a  vessel  of 
Khenem  beer,  a  cake  and  a  vessel  of  drink,  a  Shebu  cake, 
a  sut  joint,  two  vases  of  water,  cakes  of  Bet  incense,  a  Tun 
cake,  a  Shens  cake,  two  Heth  cakes,  two  Nehra  cakes, 
four  Tept  cakes,  four  Peten  cakes,  four  Shes  cakes,  four 
Amta  cakes,  four  Khenfu  cakes,  Hebent  cakes,  white  flour, 
Atet  cakes,  Pat  cakes,  a  haunch  of  beef,  a  breast  of  an 
animal,  two  ribs  of  beef,  roasted  flesh,  a  liver,  a  Nenshem 
joint,  a  Ha  joint,  a  forequarter  joint,  a  Re  goose,  a  Therp 
goose,  a  Set  goose,  a  Ser  goose,  a  swallow  (or  dove),  a  Saf 
cake,  two  Shat  cakes,  Nepat  grain,  Mest  grain,  Khenemes 
beer  or  wine,  Sekhpet  grain,  Pekh  grain,  baskets  of  figs. 
Northern  wine,  White  wine,  Pelusium  wine,  Hetem  wine, 
Senu  (Syene)  wine,  Hebnent  wine,  Asht  fruit,  Babat  fruit, 
mulberries,  Tenbes  cakes,  fruits  of  all  kinds,  flowers  of  all 
kinds,  vegetables  of  all  kinds,  etc.  Certain  articles  of  dress 
were  also  given,  and  we  see  clearly  that  the  object  of  the 
Liturgy  was  to  supply  the  deceased  with  everything  which 
was  considered  to  be  necessary  for  his  well-being  when  he 
was  alive.  The  P'yramid  Texts  and  the  7nastabah  tombs 
prove  that  this  Liturgy  was  in  use  about  3800  B.C.,  and 
the  papyri  of  the  Roman  Period  supply  copies  of  the 
text  which  show  that  it  remained  unchanged  in  form  in  the 
second  century  of  our  era.  Nothing  proves  more  clearly 
than  this  fact  that  one  of  the  fundamentals  of  the  Egyptian 
Religion  was  the  belief  in  the  efficacy  of  sacrifices  and 
offerings. 


217 


THE  PAPYRUS  OF  ANI, 
ITS   DATE  AND   CONTENTS 


m  S4  ^)  ^^^  found  at 
Thebes,  and  was  acquired  by  me  for  the  Trustees  of 
the  British  Museum  in  1888.  It  measures  78  feet  by 
I  foot  3  inches,  is  mounted  under  glass  in  thirty-seven 
sheets,  and  bears  the  number  10470.  It  is  the  finest  and 
the  longest  of  all  the  painted  papyri  inscribed  with  the 
Theban  Recension  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead.  The  Papyrus 
of  Nebseni  (No.  9900)  measures  "]•]  feet  7j-  inches  by 
13  inches  ;  the  Papyrus  of  Nu  measures  65  feet  3|-  inches 
by  I  foot  \\  inches  (No.  10477) :  the  Papyrus  of  Hunefer 
(No.  9901)  measures  18  feet  10  inches  by  i  foot  3|-  inches  ; 
the  Papyrus  of  Oenna  (at  Leyden)  is  about  50  feet  long, 
and  the  Dublin  Papyrus  published  by  Naville  (D  9  of  his 
Todteyibiuli)  is  24  feet  9  inches  long.  The  Papyrus  of 
Ani  is  made  of  six  distinct  lengths  of  papyrus  that  vary 
from  5  feet  7  inches  to  26  feet  9  inches  in  length.  The 
material  is  composed  of  three  layers  of  papyrus  supplied  by 
plants  that  measured  in  the  stalks  about  \\  inches  in 
diameter.  The  several  lengths  have  been  joined  together 
with  great  neatness,  and  the  repairs  and  insertions  (see 
Plates  XXV,  XXVI)  have  been  dexterously  executed. 
When  brought  to  England  the  papyrus  was  of  a  very  light 
colour,  similar  to  that  of  the  Papyrus  of  Hunefer  (No.  9901), 
but  after  it  was  unrolled  it  became  darker,  the  whites, 
yellows,  blues,  and  greens  lost  their  intense  vividness,  and 
certain  parts  of  the  sections  contracted. 

The  papyrus  contains  a  large  selection  of  Chapters  of 
the  Theban  Recension  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead,  nearly  all 
of  which  are  accompanied  by  Vignettes  ;  text  and  Vignettes 
have  at  top  and  bottom  a  border  of  two  colours,  red  and 
yellow,  or  yellow  and  orange.  At  the  beginning  and  end 
of  the  papyrus  spaces  of  6  and  1 1  inches  respectively 
VOL.  I.  Q 


2i8  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

were  left  blank ;  these  spaces  were  allowed  so  that  in 
unrolling  the  papyrus  the  opening  Vignette  might  not  be 
damaged,  and  that  in  rolling  it  up  the  last  Vignette  might 
not  be  damaged.  The  inscribed  portion  is  to  all  intents 
and  purposes  complete,  and  the  loss  of  the  few  characters 
that  were  damaged  in  unrolling  (see  Plates  I,  XV,  XXIV) 
does  not  interrupt  the  text.  More  than  one  scribe  seems 
to  have  been  employed  in  copying  it,  but  the  uniformity  of 
the  execution  of  the  Vignettes  suggests  that  they  are  all  the 
work  of  one  man.  Ani,  as  we  know  from  his  papyrus,  was 
a  "  veritable  scribe,"  that  is  to  say,  his  title  of  scribe  was 
not  honorary,  and  it  is  probable  that  some  of  the  Chapters 
were  copied  by  his  own  hand.  The  titles  of  the  Chapters, 
rubrics,  catchwords,  etc.,  are  written  in  red,  but  the  text 
generally  is  in  black.  In  some  instances  the  artist  who 
painted  the  Vignettes  has  occupied  so  much  space  that  the 
scribe  has  been  obliged  to  crowd  the  text  {£.£'.,  in  Plate  XI), 
and  at  times  he  has  been  obliged  to  write  it  on  the  border 
(see  Plates  XIV,  XVII).  These  facts  suggest  that  the 
Vignettes  were  drawn  and  painted  before  the  text  was 
written. 

The  different  sections  of  the  papyrus  were  not  all 
originally  written  for  Ani,  for  in  several  places  his  name 
has  been  added  by  a  later  hand,  e.^.,  in  Plates  XV,  XVI, 
XVIII,  XXII,  XXV,  XXVIII,  and  XXXVI.  As, 
however,  such  additions  do  not  occur  in  the  first  section, 
which  measures  i6  feet  4  inches  in  length,  it  must  be 
concluded  that  this  section  was  written  expressly  for  him, 
and  that  the  others  were  some  of  those  ready-written 
copies  in  which  blank  spaces  were  left  for  the  insertion  of 
the  names  of  the  deceased  persons  for  whom  they  were 
purchased.  The  scribe  who  filled  in  Ani's  name  in  those 
spaces  wrote  hurriedly,  for  in  Plate  XV  he  left  himself  no 
space   to   write   the   word    "Osiris"  in  the  phrase,   "Ani, 

whose  word  is  truth  before  Osiris,"  ^=^     1    ®^  -^'^.      In 

Plate  XVII  he  has  written  the  name  twice  ;  in  Plate  XVIII 

he  has  omitted  the  determinative  ^  ;  in  Plate  XX  he  wrote 

in  Plate  XXX  he  wrote  [  1  twice,  probably  with  a  view  of 


General  Description  219 

filling  up  the  line  ;  in  Plate  XXXIV  the  writing  of  the 
name  is  crooked,  and  the  determinative  is  omitted  ;  and  in 
Plates  XII  and  XXII  the  scribe  has  in  two  places  forgotten 
to  write  the  name  altogether.  It  seems  tolerably  clear  that 
all  the  sections  of  the  papyrus  were  written  about  the  same 
time.  The  variations  in  the  depth  of  the  space  occupied 
by  the  text,  and  the  difference  in  the  colours  of  the  border 
lines  prove  that  the  best  scribes  did  not  bind  themselves  by 
any  very  strict  rule  of  uniformity  in  such  matters.  The 
text  contains  many  serious  errors.  By  some  extraordinary 
oversight  it  includes  two  copies  of  the  XVIIIth  Chapter, 
one  with  a  most  unusual  introduction,  and  the  other  without 
any  introduction  at  all.  In  the  one  the  gods  are  grouped 
so  as  to  be  near  the  sections  of  the  text  referring  to  them, 
and  in  the  other  the  gods  are  all  seated  in  one  row. 
A  large  section  of  Chapter  XVII,  one  of  the  most 
important  of  the  whole  Book,  has  been  omitted,  and  it 
seems  as  thouofh  the  scribe  did  not  notice  the  omission  ! 
The  texts  relating  to  the  gods  of  the  mummy  chamber 
contain  so  many  mistakes  that  portions  of  them  are  wholly 
untranslatable.  Mistakes  in  spelling  and  slips  of  the  pen 
are  very  common.  Such  omissions  and  mistakes,  however, 
occur  in  papyri  older  than  that  of  Ani,  for  in  the  Papyrus 
of  Nebseni  (Brit.  Mus.  No.  9900),  which  was  written  at 
Memphis  early  in  the  XVIIIth  dynasty,  of  Chapters  L, 
LVI,  LXIV,  and  CLXXX  two  copies,  of  Chapters  C 
and  CVI  three  copies,  and  of  Chapter  XVII  two  extracts, 
are  given  in  different  parts  of  the  papyrus. 

The  Papyrus  of  Ani  is  undated,  and  it  is  impossible  to 
collect  from  it  any  exact  data  whereby  it  might  be  assigned 
to  the  reign  of  any  particular  king.  An  examination  of 
the  papyri  of  the  Theban  Period  preserved  in  the  British 
Museum  shows  that  two  distinct  classes  of  Book  of  the 
Dead  papyri  existed  in  the  XVIIIth  dynasty.  In  the  first, 
both  text  and  Vignettes  are  traced  in  black  outline,  as  in  the 
Papyrus  of  Nebseni,  the  rubrics,  catchwords,  etc.,  alone 
being  in  red  colour  ;  in  the  second,  the  text  only,  is  in 
black,  the  rubric,  titles,  catchwords,  etc.,  are  in  red  colour, 
and  the  Vignettes  are  beautifully  painted  in  a  number  of 
bright  colours.  To  the  latter  class  the  Papyrus  of  Ani 
belongs,  but,  if  the  text  and  Vignettes  be  compared  with 
those  found  in  any  other  early  Theban  papyri,   it  will  be 

Q  2 


220  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

seen  that  it  occupies  an  independent  position  in  all  respects. 
Though  agreeing"  in  the  main  with  the  papyri  of  the 
XVIIIth  dynasty  in  respect  of  textual  readings,  the  Papyrus 
of  Ani  has  peculiarities  of  spelling,  etc.,  which  are  not  found 
in  any  of  them.  The  handwriting  of  the  first  section,  at 
least,  suggests  the  best  period  of  the  XVIIIth  dynasty; 
but  as  the  scribe  forms  some  of  the  hieroglyphs  in  a  way 
peculiarly  his  own,  the  palaeographic  evidence  on  this  point 
is  not  decisive.  That  the  papyrus  belongs  to  the  period 
that  produced  such  documents  as  the  Papyrus  of  Neb-qet 
(ed.  Dev6ria,  Paris,  1872),  and  the  Papyrus  of  Qenna 
(ed.  Leemans,  Leyden,  1882),  i.e.,  to  some  period  of  the 
XVIIIth  dynasty,  is  tolerably  certain  ;  and  it  is  impossible 
not  to  assume  that  it  is  older  than  the  Papyrus  of  Hunefer, 
which  was  written  during  the  reign  of  Seti  I.  For,  though 
belonging  to  the  same  class  of  highly  decorated  papyri,  the 
execution  of  the  Vignettes  is  finer  and  more  careful,  and  the 
free,  bold  forms  of  the  hieroglyphs  in  the  better  written 
sections  more  closely  resemble  those  of  the  texts  inscribed 
in  stone  under  the  greatest  kings  of  the  XVIIIth  dynasty. 
The  "  Lord  of  the  Two  Lands,"  i.e.,  the  king  of  Upper  and 
Lower  Egypt,  mentioned  in  Plate  IV,  is  probably  one  of 
the  last  kings  of  the  XVIIIth  dynasty,  and  accordingly  we 
may  place  the  period  of  the  Papyrus  of  Ani  between 
1450  B.C.  and  1400  B.C. 

Of  the  birth  and  parentage  of  Ani  we  know  nothing, 
but  it  is  most  probable  that  his  family  was  undistinguished, 
and  that  he  owed  his  high  official  position,  under  the  king's 
favour,  to  his  ability  and  tact.      His  titles  are  : — 

I.  1  fiiJi  / — I,     "veritable    royal    scribe,"    i.e.,    he    was 

a  "  royal  scribe,"  who  really  worked  at  his  profession,  and 
not  one  who  enjoyed  the  honorary  rank  of  "  royal  scribe," 
a  title  which  was  often  bestowed  by  the  king  on  officials  of 
high  birth  and  rank. 

(or,  assessor)  of  the  divine  offerings  of  all  the  gods."  By 
this  title  it  seems  that  we  must  understand  that  Ani  was 
registrar-in- chief  of  the  offerings  that  were  made  by  the 
devout  to  all  the  gods  of  Thebes.  It  is  probable  that  it 
also  fell  to  his  duty  to  assess  the  amounts  of  produce,  grain, 


General  Description  221 

cattle,  etc.,  which  the  various  priesthoods  of  Egypt 
demanded  from  wealthy  Egyptians  as  obligatory  contri- 
butions to  the  revenues  of  their  gods. 

©,   "overseer  of  the  granaries 


^ffl 


W  Ml 


of  the  Lords  of  Abydos."  The  offerings  of  grain,  dhura, 
wheat,  etc.,  were  delivered  by  their  givers  to  the  temple 
granaries,  or  probably  to  a  single  granary  which  served  as 
a  general  storehouse  for  the  grain  that  was  the  property  of 
the  various  gods.  This  granary  was  very  large,  and  the 
management  of  it  must  have  demanded  great  knowledge 
and  ability  on  the  part  of  its  manager. 

4-  fir^ls^  —  TiT!©'  "'"^"^^  ""^  ^^^  ^^''^"^ 

offerings  of  the  Lords  of  Thebes."  If  the  wealth  possessed 
by  the  temples  of  Thebes  under  the  XVIIIth  dynasty  be 
considered  for  a  moment,  it  will  at  once  be  clear  that  this 
office  of  Ani  was  one  of  very  great  importance,  and  one 
demanding  not  only  the  highest  ability,  but  the  highest 
integrity  on  the  part  of  the  holder. 

Tutu,  l^  ll^rl)'  the  wife  of  Ani,  is  called  "lady  of 
the  house,"  ,  and  shemat  en  Amen,  -^^r^  -^wwv  \\         jj , 

i.e.,  "  singing  woman  of  Amen."  The  first  title  shows  that 
Tutu  was  Ani's  chief  wife,  if  he  had  more  than  one  wife, 
and  the  second  that  she  was  one  of  the  ladies  of  good  family 
who  were  officially  attached  to  the  service  of  Amen-Ra,  the 
king  of  the  gods,  at  Thebes.  She  attended  in  the  temple, 
and  was  one  of  the  ladies  of  the  choir  who  sang  hymns  to 
Amen  and  portions  of  the  Liturgy.  She  Is  usually  repre- 
sented carrying  a  sistrum,  which  she  rattled  as  she  sang  in 
the  choruses.  The  wires  of  the  sistrum  made  a  peculiar 
sound  which  was  believed  to  be  efficacious  in  driving  away 
fiends  from  the  sanctuary.  Thus,  though  Ani  was  a  lay 
scribe,  his  wife  was  a  priestess,  and  it  is  probable  that  he 
owed  some  of  the  offices  which  he  enjoyed  to  her  influence. 

The  contents  of  the  Papyrus  of  Ani  may  be  divided 
into  two  parts  : — 

Part  I  contains  :  A  Hymn  to  Ra,  introductory  to  the 
Judgment  Scene  (Plate  I),  a  Hymn  to  Osiris,  also  intro- 
ductory to  the  Judgment  Scene  (Plate  H) ;  the  former  has 
two  Vignettes,  the  first  being  on  Plate  I  and  the  second  on 


222  The  Papyrus  of  Aiii 

Plate  II.  The  second  Vignette  represents  the  Sunrise  in 
the  physical  world,  and  the  resurrection  of  Osiris  and  also 
of  the  deceased,  who  is  identified  with  Osiris  and  is  called 
"  the  Osiris,"  in  the  Other  World.  This  Vignette  is 
commonly  known  as  Chapter  XVI,  and,  as  it  immediately 
follows  the  Hymn  to  Ra,  it  shows  that  the  scribe  regarded 
this  introductory  hymn  as  a  form  of  Chapter  XV. 
Following  the  hymns  comes  the  great  Judgment  Scene, 
which  is  supposed  to  take  place  in  the  Hall  of  Maati,  or  the 
Hall  of  the  Two  Truth-goddesses,  at  the  end  of  which 
Osiris  sits  enthroned  within  his  shrine.  The  weighing  of 
the  heart  of  Ani  is  depicted  in  Plate  III,  and  the  presenta- 
tion of  Ani  to  Osiris  by  Horus,  the  son  of  I  sis,  after  he  has 
been  declared  to  be  a  speaker  of  the  truth  by  Thoth  and 
the  Gods  of  Anu,  on  Plate  IV.  The  Judgment  Scene  m 
the  Papyrus  of  Ani  is  more  fully  represented  and  better 
described  than  in  any  other  papyrus  containing  the  Theban 
Recension.  Usually  the  Introductory  Section  opens  with 
a  Vignette  of  Osiris  and  a  short  address  or  hymn  to  the 
god,  but  here  the  Hymn  to  Ra  precedes  everything.  This 
fact  suggests  that  at  the  close  of  the  XVIIIth  dynasty, 
under  the  influence  of  the  priests  of  Amen,  the  Sun-god 
began  to  invade  the  domains  of  Osiris,  and  to  assert  his 
sovereignty  over  Night  and  Dead-land  as  well  as  over  Day 
and  the  Land  of  the  Living. 

Part  II  contains  a  long  series  of  Chapters  of  the 
Theban  Recension  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead,  which  appear 
in  the  following  order  : — 

I,  with  Vignette,  Plates  V  and  VI  ;  XXII,  Plate  VI  ; 
Rubric  of  LXXII,  Plate  VI  ;  XVII,  with  a  long  series  of 
Vignettes,  Plates  VII-X  ;  CXLVII,  the  Seven  Arits,  with 
Vignettes,  Plates  XI  and  XII  ;  CXLVI,  the  Ten  Pylons, 
with  Vignettes,  Plates  XI  and  XII  ;  XVIII,  Introductions, 
with  Vignettes,  Plate  XII  ;  XVIII,  with  Vignettes,  Plates 
XIII  and  XIV;  XXI 1 1,  with  Vignette,  Plate  XV  ;  XXIV, 
Plate  XV;  XXVI,  with  Vignette,  Plate  XV;  XXXb, 
Plates  III  and  XV;  LXI,  with  Vignette,  Plate  XV; 
LIV,  with  Vignette,  Plate  XV;  XXIX,  with  Vignette, 
Plate  XV  ;  XXVII,  with  Vignette,  Plates  XV  and  XVI  ; 
LVIII.  with  Vignette.  Plate  XVI;  LIX,  with  Vignette, 
Plate  XVI  ;  XLIV,  with  Vignette.  Plate  XVI  ;  XLV, 
with  Vignette,  Plate  XVI;  XLV  I,  with  Vignette,  Plate  XVI; 


General  Description  223 

L,  with  Vignette,  Plate  XVI;  XCIII,  with  Vignette, 
Plate  XVII  ;  XCI I Ia,  with  Vignette,  Plate  XVII;  XLIII. 
Plate  XVII;  LXXXIX,  with  Vignette,  Plate  XVII; 
XCI,  with  Vignette,  Plate  XVII  ;  XCI  I,  with  Vignette, 
Plate  XVII;  LXXIV,  with  Vignette,  Plate  XVIII; 
VIII,  with  Vignette,  Plate  XVIII  ;  II,  with  Vignette, 
Plate  XVIII;  IX,  with  Vignette,  Plate  XVIII  ;  CXXXII, 
with  Vignette,  Plate  XVI 1 1  ;  X  or  XLVIII,  with  Vignette, 
Plate  XVIII  ;    XV,  with  three  Vignettes,   Plates  XVIII- 

XXI  ;    CXXXII  I,    with  two  Vignettes,  Plates  XXI    and 

XXII  ;  CXXXIV,  with  Vignette,  Plate  XXII  ;  Vignette  of 
the  Ladder,  Plate  XXII  ;  XVIII  bis,  with  Vignettes,  Plates 

XXIII  and  XXIV  ;  CXXIV,  with  Vignette,  Plate  XXIV  ; 
LXXXVI,  with  Vignette,  Plate  XXV;  LXXVII,  with  Vig- 
nette, Plate  XXV;  LXXVIII,  with  Vignette,  Plates XXV 
and  XXVI;  LXXXVII,  with  Vignette,  Plate  XXVII; 
LXXXVIII,  with  Vignette,  Plate  XXVII;  LXXXII, 
with  Vignette,  Plate  XXVII  ;  LXXXV,  with  Vignette, 
Plate  XXVII  ;  LXXXII  I,  with  Vignette,  Plate  XXVII  ; 
LXXXIV.  with  Vignette,  Plate  XXVIII  ;  LXXXIa,  with 
Vignette,  Plate  XXVIII  ;  LXXX,  with  Vignette,  Plate 
XXVIII  ;  CLXXV,  with  Vignette,  Plate  XXIX  ;  CXXV, 
Introduction,  with  two  Vignettes,  Plates  XXIX  and  XXX  ; 
CXXV,  The  Negative  Confession,  with  four  Vignettes, 
Plates  XXXI  and  XXXII;  XLII,  with  Vignette,  Plate 
XXXII  :  Rubric  to  XLII  or  CXXV,  with  Vignette,  Plate 
XXXII;  CLV,  with  Vignette,  Plate  XXXIII;  CLVI, 
with  Vignette,  Plate  XXXIII  ;  XXIXb,  with  Vignette, 
Plate  XXXIII  ;  CLXVI,  with  Vignette,  Plate  XXXIII  ; 
CLI,  with  a  complete  series  of  Vignettes,  Plates  XXXIII 
and  XXXIV  ;   CX,  portions  only,  with  Vignettes,   Plates 

XXXIV  and  XXXV;    CXLVIII,  with  Vignettes,  Plates 

XXXV  and  XXXVI  ;  CLXXXV,  with  Vignette,  Plate 
XXXVI;  CLXXXVI,  with  Vignette,  Plate  XXXVII. 
The  titles  of  these  Chapters,  arranged  according  to  the 
numeration  introduced  by  Lepsius  in  his  Todtenbuch,  are 
as  follows  : — 

Chapter  I.  "  Here  begin  the  Chapters  of  Coming 
"  Forth  by  Day,  and  of  the  songs  of  praise  and  glorifying, 
"  and  of  coming  forth  from  and  of  going  into  the  glorious 
"  Khert-Neter  in  the  Beautiful  Amenti.  It  shall  be  recited 
"  on  the  day  of  the  burial  ;  going  in  after  coming  forth." 


224  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

See  Plates  V  and  VI.  The  papyri  belonging  to  the  early 
part  of  the  XVIIIth  dynasty  call  this  Chapter  "The 
"  Chapter  of  entering  into  the  presence  of  the  Tchatchau 


••  Chiefs  of  Osiris."  ^  -"  ^  A  •="  i  !  i  i  i  ,  /^  •  "^^^^ 
large  numbers  of  the  men  attending  the  bier  and  of  the 
weeping  women  are  peculiar  to  the  Ani  Papyrus. 

Chapter  II.  "  The  Chapter  of  Coming  Forth  by  Day 
and  of  living  after  death."     See  Plate  XVIII. 

Chapter  VI.  In  the  Papyrus  ot  Ani,  this  Chapter  is 
included  in  Chapter  CLI.  See  Plate  XXXII.  In  the 
Papyrus  of  Nebseni  (Brit.  Mus.  No.  99Cxd)  the  Chapter 
stands  by  itself,  and  is  entided,  "The  Chapter  of  making  the 
Ushabti  figure  to  perform  work  for  a  man  in  Khert-Neter," 

Chapter  VIII.  "The  Chapter  of  making  a  way 
through  Amenti,  and  of  coming  forth  by  day."  See 
Plate  XVIII.  This  composition  is  sometimes  incorporated 
with  another  Chapter. 

Chapter  IX.  "  The  Chapter  of  Coming  Forth  by  Day, 
having  passed  through  the  Amhet  chamber."  See  Plate 
XVIII.  The  Vignette  in  the  Papyrus  of  Ani  is  similar 
to  that  which  stands  at  the  head  of  Chapters  VIII  and  IX 
in  other  papyri  of  this  period. 

Chapter  X,  or  Chapter  XLVIII.  "Another  Chapter 
"  to  be  said  by  a  man  who  cometh  forth  by  day  against  his 
"  enemies  in  Khert-Neter."     See  Plate  XVIII. 

Chapter  XV.  i.  "A  Hymn  of  Praise  to  Ra  when  he 
riseth  in  the  eastern  sky."  See  Plate  I.  This  version  of 
the  Chapter  is  peculiar  to  the  Papyrus  of  Ani. 

Chapter  XV.  2.  "A  Hymn  of  Praise  to  Osiris  Un- 
Nefer,  the  great  god  who  dwelleth  in  Abydos."  See 
Plate  II.  Osiris  is  in  this  hymn  regarded  as  one  of  the 
two  forms  of  Ra,  and  is  therefore  included  in  this  Chapter. 

Chapter  XV.  3.  "  A  Hymn  of  Praise  to  Ra  when  he 
"  riseth  in  the  eastern  sky,  and  when  he  setteth  in  the  land 
"  of  life."     See  Plates  XVIII-XXI. 

Chapter  XVI.  Owing  to  the  numbering  of  the 
Chapters  by  Lepsius  this  consists  of  a  Vignette  only,  which, 
as  has  been  already  said,  belongs  to  Chapter  XV,  or  to  that 
part  of  it  which  refers  to  the  rising  sun.      It  may  be  noted 


General  Description  225 

in  passing  that  the  Papyrus  of  Ani,  like  many  ancient 
papyri  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead,  contains  no  Vignette  of 
the  Sunset.     See  Plate  II. 

Chapter  XVII.  "  Here  begin  the  praises  and 
"  glorifyings  of  coming  out  from  and  of  going  into  the 
"  glorious  Khert-Neter  in  the  Beautiful  Amenti,  of  coming 
"  forth  by  day  in  all  the  transformations  which  it  may  please 
"  the  deceased  to  assume,  of  playing  at  draughts,  and  of 
"  sitting  in  the  Set  chamber,  and  of  coming  forth  as  a 
"living  heart-soul."  See  Plates  VII-X.  This  is  one  of 
the  oldest  and  most  important  Chapters  of  the  Theban 
Recension,  and  in  the  form  here  given  contains  the  dogmas 
about  God  and  the  creation  of  the  sun,  moon,  stars, 
and  earth,  and  about  Osiris,  and  the  gods  and  goddesses 
who  were  associated  with  him,  as  formulated  by  the  priest- 
hood of  Ra  at  Heliopolis.  The  variant  readings  may 
represent  the  views  of  the  priesthood  of  Thebes.  A  large 
section  of  the  text  is,  quite  unaccountably,  omitted  by  the 
scribe,  and  the  missing  lines  have  been  supplied  from  the 
Papyrus  of  Nebseni. 

Chapter  XVIII.  This  is  without  a  title  in  the  Papyrus 
of  Ani,  a  fact  which  suggests  that  the  Chapter  was  regarded 
by  the  Theban  scribes  as  the  continuation  of  Chapter  XVII. 
A  few  papyri  give  it  a  title,  viz.,  "  The  Chapter  of  entering 
into  the  presence  of  the  Tchatchau  Chiefs."  The  Papyrus 
of  Ani  contains  two  copies  of  this  Chapter.  In  the  first 
the  gods  of  the  towns  are  grouped  in  a  series  of  Vignettes, 
each  of  which  stands  near  the  Section  which  it  illustrates. 
This  copy  is  preceded  by  an  Introduction,  which  is  peculiar 
to  the  Papyrus  of  Ani.  The  Anmutef  and  Sameref  priests 
are  seen  introducing  Ani  to  the  gods,  with  appropriate 
speeches,  and  the  addresses  of  Ani  are  given.  See  Plates 
XII-XIV.  In  the  second  copy  the  gods  are  not  separated 
into  groups,  but  are  arranged  in  a  row  above  the  text ;  a 
few  of  the  gods  mentioned  in  the  text  are  omitted  in  this 
copy.     See  Plates  XXIII  and  XXIV. 

Chapter  XXII.  "The  Chapter  of  giving  a  mouth  to 
the  Osiris  Ani,  the  scribe  and  registrary  of  all  the  gods."  See 
Plate  VI.  This  Chapter  is  without  Vignette  in  the  Papyrus 
of  Ani,  and  it  is  remarkable  that  it  follows  Chapter  I. 
Perhaps  the  concluding  passage  of  Chapter  I,  which  deals 
with  offerings,  suggested  that  the  text  that  would  provide 


226  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

Ani  with  a  mouth  to  eat  the  same  should  follow  imme- 
diately. 

Chapter  XXI 1 1.  "  The  Chapter  of  opening  the  mouth 
of  the  Osiris,  the  scribe  Ani  "  ;  this  is  a  kind  of  supplement 
to  the  preceding  Chapter.     See  Plate  XV. 

Chapter  XXV.  "The  Chapter  of  bringing  words  of 
power  unto  the  Osiris  Ani  in  Khert-Neter."  See  Plate  XV. 
As  in  other  ancient  Theban  papyri  this  Chapter  is  without 
Vignette  in  the  Papyrus  of  Ani. 

Chapter  XXVI.  "The  Chapter  of  giving  a  heart 
unto  the  Osiris  Ani  in  Khert-Neter."  See  Plate  XV.  The 
Vignette  to  this  Chapter  in  the  Papyrus  of  Ani  is  probably 
unique. 

Chapter  XXVII.  "The  Chapter  of  not  letting  the 
heart  of  a  man  be  snatched  away  from  him  in  Khert-Neter." 
See  Plate  XV.  The  Vignette  to  this  Chapter  in  the  Papyrus 
of  Ani  is  uncommon. 

Chapter  XXIX.  "The  Chapter  of  not  letting  the 
heart  of  a  man  be  snatched  away  from  him  in  Khert-Neter." 
See  Plate  XV.  No  other  copy  of  this  Chapter  is  at  present 
known. 

Chapter  XXIXb.  "The  Chapter  of  a  heart  of  car- 
nelian."     See  Plate  XXXI 1 1. 

Chapter  XXXb.  "  The  Chapter  of  not  letting  the 
heart  of  a  man  be  driven  away  from  him  in  Khert-Neter." 
See  Plate  XV.  An  imperfect  duplicate  copy  is  also  given 
in  the  Judgment  Scene.     See  Plate  III. 

Chapter  XLII.  Only  a  portion  of  the  Chapter  is 
given,  and  that  in  tabular  form,  and  without  title.  See 
Plate  XXXI  I.  In  the  older  papyri  the  tide  of  the  Chapter 
is     "The     Chapter    of    repulsing    slaughter    in     Hensu " 

;^4.^^X\^;^ii)=(the    Herakleopolis 

of  the  Greeks). 

Chapter  XLIII.  "The  Chapter  of  not  letting  the 
head  of  a  man  be  cut  off  from  his  body  in  Khert-Neter." 
See  Plate  XVII.  As  in  other  Theban  papyri  this  Chapter 
is  without  Vignette  in  the  Papyrus  of  Ani. 

Chapter  XLI  V.  "  The  Chapter  of  not  dying  a  second 
time  in  Khert-Neter."  See  Plate  XVI.  Chapter  CLXXV 
has  the  same  tide.  The  Vignette  is  peculiar  to  the  Papyrus 
of  Ani. 


General  Description  227 

Chapter  XLV.  "  The  Chapter  of  not  suffering  cor- 
ruption in  Khert-Neter."  See  Plate  XVI.  Among 
Theban  papyri  the  Vignette  is  peculiar  to  the  Papyrus 
of  Ani. 

Chapter  XLV  I.  "  The  Chapter  of  not  perishing,  and 
of  becomino-  alive  in  Khert-Neter."  See  Plate  XVI. 
Among  Theban  papyri  the  Vignette  is  peculiar  to  the 
Papyrus  of  Ani. 

Chapter  XLVIII.  "Another  Chapter  of  one  who 
Cometh  forth  by  day  against  his  foes  in  Khert-Neter." 
See  Plate  XVIII.  Among  Theban  papyri  the  Vignette  is 
peculiar  to  the  Papyrus  of  Ani.  The  text  of  this  Chapter 
agrees  rather  with  the  second  version  in  the  Papyrus 
of  Nebseni  than  with  that  of  Brit.  Mus.  No.  9964.  As 
the  Papyrus  of  Ani  is  of  Theban  origin  this  was  to  be 
expected. 

Chapter  LIV.  "The  Chapter  of  providing  air  in 
Khert-Neter."  See  Plate  XV.  Another  copy  of  this 
Chapter  published  by  Naville  {pp.  cit.,  Einleiiung,  p.  134) 
is  without  Vignette. 

Chapter  LVIII.  "  The  Chapter  of  breathing  the  air, 
and  of  having  power  over  the  water  in  Khert-Neter." 
See  Plate  XVI.     Copies  of  this  Chapter  are  very  rare. 

Chapter  LIX.  "The  Chapter  of  breathing  the  air, 
and  of  having  power  over  the  water  in  Khert-Neter."  See 
Plate  XVI.     Copies  of  this  Chapter  are  very  rare. 

Chapter  LXI.  "The  Chapter  of  not  letting  the  soul 
of  a  man  be  taken  away  from  him  in  Khert-Neter."  See 
Plate  XV.  The  Vignette  is  similar  to  that  found  in  the 
Papyrus  of  Sutimes. 

Chapter  LXXII--Rubric.     See  Plate  VI. 

Chapter  LXXIV.  "  The  Chapter  of  walking  with 
the  legs  and  of  coming  forth  upon  the  earth,"  See 
Plate  XVI 1 1. 

Chapter  LXXVII.  "The  Chapter  of  making  the 
transformation  into  a  golden  hawk."     See  Plate  XXV. 

Chapter  LXXVII  I.  "The  Chapter  of  making  the 
transformation  into  the  hawk  that  is  divine."  See 
Plates  XXV  and  XXVI. 

Chapter  LXXX.  "  The  Chapter  of  making  the  trans- 
"  formation  into  the  god  who  produceth  light  to  illumine 
"  the  darkness."     See  Plate  XXVIII. 


228  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

Chapter  LXXXIa.  "  The  Chapter  of  making  the 
transformation  into  the  lotus  (or  lily)."  See  Plate  XXV III. 
The  pool  of  water  in  the  Vignette  is  uncommon. 

Chapter  LXXXII.  "The  Chapter  of  making  the 
transformation  into  the  god  Ptah."  See  Plate  XXVII. 
As  in  other  papyri  of  the  same  period  this  Chapter  has 
a  Vignette. 

Chapter  LXXXIII.  "The  Chapter  of  making  the 
transformation  into  the  Benu  bird  (phoenix  .'*)."  See 
Plate  XXVI I.  This  Chapter  lacks  the  addition  that  is 
found  in  the  Papyrus  of  Sutimes  ;  several  other  papyri  also 
lack  the  addition. 

Chapter  LXXXIV.  "The  Chapter  of  making  the 
transformation  into  a  heron."     See  Plate  XXVI. 

Chapter  LXXXV.  "  The  Chapter  of  making  the 
transformation  into  the  soul  of  Temu."  See  Plate  XXVII. 
The  Vignette  of  this  Chapter  is  similar  to  that  of  the 
Papyrus  of  Tura,  surnamed  Nefer-uben-f,  of  the  XVIIIth 
dynasty. 

Chapter  LXXXVI.  "  The  Chapter  of  making  the 
transformation  into  the  swallow."     See  Plate  XXV. 

Chapter  LXXXVI  I.  "The  Chapter  of  making  the 
"  transformation  into  the  serpent  Sa-ta  {i.e.,  Son  of  the 
"  Earth)."     See  Plate  XXVII. 

Chapter  LXXXVIII.  "The  Chapter  of  making  the 
transformation  into  a  crocodile."     See  Plate  XXVII. 

Chapter  LXXXIX.  "  The  Chapter  of  causing  the 
soul  to  be  united  to  its  body  in  Khert-Neter."  See 
Plate  XVII.  The  two  standards  for  censers,  which  stand 
one  at  the  head  and  one  at  the  foot  of  the  bier,  are  peculiar 
to  the  Papyrus  of  Ani. 

Chapter  XCI.  "  The  Chapter  of  not  letting  the  soul 
of  a  man  be  kept  captive  in  Khert-Neter."     See  Plate  XVI  I. 

Chapter  XCI  I.  "The  Chapter  of  opening  the  tomb 
"  to  the  soul  and  the  shadow,  of  coming  forth  by  day,  and 
"  of  getting  power  over  the  legs."  See  Plate  XVlI.  The 
Vignette  of  this  Chapter  is  unusual  and  of  great  interest, 
for  in  it  Ani's  soul  accompanies  his  shadow. 

Chapter  XCI  1 1.  "  The  Chapter  of  not  letting  a  man 
travel  to  the  East  in  Khert-Neter."  See  Plate  XVII. 
The  arrangement  of  the  Vignette  of  this  Chapter  is  peculiar 
to  the  Papyrus  of  Ani. 


General  Description  229 

Chapter  XCIIIa.  "Another  Chapter."  See  Plate 
XVII. 

Chapter  CX.  "  Here  begin  the  Chapters  of  the 
"  Sekhet-Hetepet,  and  the  Chapters  of  Coming  Forth  by 
*'  Day,  and  of  going  into  and  coming  forth  from  Khert- 
"  Neter,  and  of  arriving  in  the  Sekhet-Aaru,  and  of  being 
"  in  peace  in  the  great  city  wherein  are  fresh  breezes." 
See  Plate  XXXIV.  Many  of  the  details  of  the  Vignette 
are  peculiar  to  the  Papyrus  of  Ani,  and  the  text  of  the 
Chapter  given  only  contains  a  few  of  its  opening  lines. 

Chapter  CXXIV.  "  The  Chapter  of  going  into  the 
presence  of  the  Tchatchau  Chiefs  of  Osiris."  See 
Plate  XXIV.     One  god  is  wanting  in  the  Vignette. 

Chapter  CXXV,  Part  i.  "  The  Chapter  of  entering 
into  the  Hall  of  Maati  ;  a  Hymn  to  Osiris."  See 
Plate  XXX.  The  text  of  this  part  as  found  in  the 
Papyrus  of  Ani  is  not  met  with  elsewhere. 

Chapter  CXXV,  Part  n.  The  "  Negative  Confession" 
[without  title].  The  Vignette  possesses  four  sub- Vignettes, 
which  are  peculiar  to  the  Papyrus  of  Ani.     See  Plate  XXXI. 

Chapter  CXXV.     [Omitted  in  the  Papyrus  of  Ani.] 

Chapter  CXXXII.  "  The  Chapter  of  making  a  man 
to  return  to  see  again  upon  the  earth."     See  Plate  XVI 1 1. 

Chapter  CXXXIII.  ["A  Chapter]  to  be  said  on  the 
[first]  day  of  the  moon."     See  Plate  XXI. 

Chapter  CXXXIII— Rubric.     See  Plate  XXII. 

Chapter  CXXXIV.  "A  Hymn  of  praise  to  Ra  on 
the  [first]  day  of  the  month  wherein  he  saileth  in  the  boat." 
See  Plate  XXII. 

Chapter  CXLVI.  "  The  Chapter  of  the  Pylons  in 
the  House  of  Osiris  that  is  in  Sekhet-Aaru."  See 
Plates  XI  and  XII. 

Chapter  CXLVI  I.  ["A  Chapter  which  is  to  be  said 
when  Ani  cometh  to  the  Arits."]     See  Plates  XI  and  XII. 

Chapter  CXLVIII.  ["The  Chapter  of  providing 
Ani  with  food."     Without  title  in  the  Papyrus  of  Ani.] 

Chapter  CLI.  A  series  of  texts  containing  the 
speeches  which  are  made  by  the  gods,  goddesses,  and 
amulet-spirits  who  protect  the  mummy  of  Ani  on  its  bier 
and  in  the  mummy  chamber.  See  Plates  XXXIII  and 
XXXIV.  Some  of  these  texts  are  so  corrupt  as  to  be  in 
places  unintelligible.     Many  of  the  details  of  the  Vignettes 


230  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

are  incorrect,  and  the  artist  appears  not  to  have  understood 
the  general  plan  of  the  Vignette  which  he  copied. 

Chapter  CLV,  "  The  Chapter  of  a  Tet  of  gold."  See 
Plate  XXXIII. 

Chapter  CLVI.  "  The  Chapter  of  a  Tet  of  carnelian." 
See  Plate  XXXI 1 1. 

Chapter  CLXVI.  "The  Chapter  of  the  headrest 
which  is  to  be  placed  under  the  head  of  Ani."  See 
Plate  XXXIII. 

Chapter  CLXXV.  "  The  Chapter  of  not  dying  a 
second  time."  See  Plate  XXIX.  This  Chapter  is  incom- 
plete, and  breaks  off  in  the  middle  of  a  sentence.  It  is, 
however,  most  valuable,  for  only  one  other  copy  of  it  is 
known.  This  second  copy  is  found  in  a  papyrus  at  Leyden, 
but,  as  the  beginnings  and  ends  of  a  large  number  of  lines 
are  wanting,  it  is  impossible  to  make  a  connected  translation 
from  it. 

Chapter  CLXXXV.  "  A  Hymn  of  Praise  to  Osiris 
Khenti  Amenti  Un-Nefer,  the  dweller  in  Abtu."  See 
Plate  XXXVI. 

Chapter  CLXXXVI.  [A  Hymn  of  Praise  to  Hathor 
in  her  character  of  goddess  of  the  Beautiful  Amenti.]  See 
Plate  XXXVII. 


231 


THE  PAPYRUS  OF   ANI 

DESCRIPTION    OF    THE    PLATES 

PLATE  I 

Vignette:  The  scribe  Ani  '^'^OQ^'  standing 
with  his  hands  raised  in  adoration  before  a  table  of  offerings 
consisting  of  haunches  of  beef  cv,  loaves  of  bread  and 

cakes   A,   Q,  (f=^,  c^D,  Q,  {},   vases   of  wine   Q,   oil  ^0=, 

fruits,    vegetables,    lilies  W,  ^,  and  other  flowers.       He 

wears  a  close-fitting  tunic  covered  with  a  white  and  saffron- 
coloured  garment,  which  reaches  to  his  ankles ;  from  the 
shoulders  hang  long  fringes.  On  his  head  is  a  wig  that 
reaches  his  shoulders,  about  his  neck  hangs  a  necklace,  and 
he  wears  bracelets  and  armlets.  He  stands  barefooted  in 
the  presence  of  his  god,  and  he  is  supposed  to  be  in  a  state 
of  ceremonial  purity.  Behind  him  stands  his  wife,  "  The 
Osiris,  the  lady  of  the  house,  the  singing  woman  of  Amen," 

r|^  ifl  ^  '^■^^^  (1  ,    who    was    called    Tutu 

]  ^  ]  ^  ^.     (For   the    name    see    Plate    XIX.)     This 

description  of  Tutu  shows  that  she  was  probably  dead 
when  the  papyrus  was  written,  and  her  title  "  lady  of  the 
house "  indicates  that  she  was  either  Ani's  sole  wife,  or 
that  she  was  the  chief  of  his  wives.  Tutu  wears  a  long 
plain  linen  garment  that  reaches  to  her  feet,  and  her  long, 
wavy  black  hair  flows  down  from  her  head  over  her 
shoulders.  A  cluster  of  lilies,  or  lotus,  lies  above  her  hair, 
with  their  blossoms  projecting  over  her  forehead.  Above  is 
a  small  object,  made  probably  of  reeds  or  light  wood,  which 
contains  a  ball  of  scented  unguent  ;  this  melted  by  degrees 
and  ran  down  over  the  head  and  shoulders,  diffusing  a 
sweet   odour,   and    affording    Tutu    pleasure.      She    wears 


232 


The  Papyrus  of  Ani 


bracelets  and   armlets.      In   her   right   hand   she  grasps   a 
bunch  of  flowers  and  a  sistrum  a,  and  in  her  left  are  a 


vine-branch  and  a  me^idt  ^  .     The  mendt  was  an  object 

that  was  sometimes  offered  to 
the  eods  with  the  sistrum.  It 
was  presented  to  guests  at  a 
feast  by  their  host,  and  was 
regularly  carried  by  priestesses 
at  religious  festivals.  It  was 
sometimes  hunor  round  the  neck, 
and  sometimes  carried  in  the 
left  hand.  It  was  believed  to 
convey  to  the  holder  virility 
and  strength,  and  was  originally 


Fig.  1. 


Fig.  2. 


an  emblem  of  sexual  pleasure.  See 
the  paper  by  Lef^bure,  "  Le  Menat, 
et  le  Nom  de  I'eunuque,"  in  Proc. 
Soc.  Bibl.  Arch.,  1891,  pp.  333-349. 
Many  very  fine  examples  of  the 
7}2endt  may  be  seen  in  the  British 
Museum,  e.g.,  Nos.  17 166,  13950, 
8172,  8173,  20607, 18109,  etc.  Tutu 
carries  the  sistrum  and  mendt  as 
symbols  of  her  position  at  Thebes 
as  "singing  woman"  of  Amen-Ra, 
the  King  of  the  Gods.  She  shook 
the  sistrum  during  the  services  in 
the  sanctuary,  and  the  rattling  noise 
made  by  the  wires  drove  away  the 


evil  spirits  who  wished  to 
obstruct  the  service  of  the 
god.  She  carried  the  viendt 
as  a  symbol  of  her  allegiance 
to  Amen-Ra,  the  god  of  viri- 
lity, generation,  and  concep- 
tion. 

Text  :  A  version  of 
Chapter  XV.  In  the  older 
papyri  the  opening  section  is 
always  a  hymn  to  Osiris,  the 
King   and    Judge    of   the   dead,   but   at    the  close  of   the 


Fir..  X. 


The  Sunrise 


233 


XVIIIth   dynasty,   when  the  power  of  Ra,  or  Amen-Ra, 

was  paramount  at  Thebes,  a  hymn  to  Ra  was  given  the 

place  of  honour  in  hieroglyphic  papyri,  which  always  begin 

at  the    left-hand    end    of   the    rolls.      The   subject  of  the 

hymn  is  the  glory  of  Ra,  who  is  identified  with  Khepera, 

Tatun,  and  other  great  cosmic  gods.     The  defeat  of  Aapep, 

the  great  adversary  of 

Ra,   is  commemorated 

in   boastful  terms,  and 

the  overthrow  of  all  the 

fiends  of  the  Evil  One 

is  frequently  referred  to. 

The   commonest_  form 

of  the  monster  Aapep 

is  a  crocodile  (Fig.  i), 

which  crouched  by  the  pjc  ^ 

path    of    the    sun    at 

dawn  ready  to  swallow  up   the  solar  disk.      Next  we  see 

him  in  the  form  of  a  huge  speckled  python  (Fig.  2),  then 

as    an    ordinary  serpent   (Fig.   3),   and   finally  as    a   huge 

serpent  of  many  folds  biting  the   neck  of  the  Ass,  which 

represents  the  Sun-god  (Fig.  4). 


PLATE   II 

Vignette :  A  scene  representing  the  sunrise.  Here 
we  see  the  disk  of  the  sun  O,  resting  on  the  top  of  the  loop 
of  the  symbol  of  "life"  ■¥-,  and  supported  by  two  human 

arms  and  hands.     The  ankh  ■¥-,  rests  upon  the  top  of  the 

Tet  K ,  which  rests  upon  a  reed  mat.     The  Tet  represents 

Osiris,  who  was,  in  one  aspect,  the  dead  sun  of  yesterday, 
and  from  it  proceeds  the  power  of  "  life,"  which  sends  forth 
the  solar  disk  on  its  course.     On  the  upper  part  of  the  Tet 

are    the    two    titchats  ^^1^2,   or  Eyes  of  the  Sun  and 

Moon,  with  T,  the  symbol  of  "good,"  between  them.     On 

each  side  of  the  solar  disk  are  three  apes,  with  their  paws 
raised  in  adoration  of  the  great  luminary.  These  sing  to 
the  sun  in  the  form  of  the  Spirits  of  the  Dawn  whilst  he  is 
rising,  but  as  soon  as  he  has  risen  they  turn  into  apes.     On 


VOL.  I. 


R 


234 


The  Papyrus  of  Ani 


the  left  of  the  Tet  is  the  goddess  Isis  ]^  T  (VS .  and  on  the 

right  the  goddess  Nebt-het,  or  Nephthys  ;  each  goddess 
kneels  on  the  emblem  of  "gold,"  and  each  has  her  hands 
raised  in  adoration  of  the  Sun-god.     Over  all  is  stretched 

the  vault  of  the  sky  '(^ "^^^^^xy*-     This  Vignette  belongs, 

properly  speaking,  to  the  Hymn  to   Ra  on   Plate  I,  which 

Ani  was  intended  to  say  as  the  sun  rose. 

Fig.  I  is  the  Vignette  of  the  Sunrise  as  it  is  found  in 
the  Papyrus  of  Hunefer.  Here  the  sun 
appears  in  the  well-known  form  of  a 
hawk,  with  the  solar  disk  encircled  by 
a  serpent  upon  his  head.  The  apes 
that  adore  him  are  seven  in  number, 

and  are  called  ''  A?nhetet-Rd''  nr  ^^ 

^Z^\  ^i-  Below  the  hawk 
stands  the  Tet  of  Osiris,  which  is  here 
provided  with  a  pair  of  human  arms 
and  hands  holding  the  symbols  of  sove- 
reignty, a  crook  |  ,  and  a  flail  /\.      On 

each  side  of  the  Tet  stands  a  goddess, 
that  on   the  left  of  it   being   Isis,  and 

that  on  the  right   Nephthys.     The  legends  read  :   "  I   am 

thy  sister  Isis,"  "  I  am  thy  sister  Nephthys." 

Text :  A  Hymn  to  Osiris.  This  is  a  short  com- 
position that  merely  enumerates  the  titles  of  Osiris,  and 
refers  to  him  in  his  character  of  the  everlasting  ruler  of 
heaven  and  giver  of  life  to  men.  The  Vignette  is  prac- 
tically a  repetition  of  that  on  Plate  I. 


YlG.    I. 


PLATE   III 

Vignette  :  Scene  of  the  Weighing  of  the  Heart 

of  the  deceased  in  the  Judgment  Hall  of  Osiris.  Ani  and 
his  wife  Tutu  enter  the  Hall  of  Maati,  wherein  the  heart  O , 
emblematic  of  the  conscience,  is  to  be  weighed  in  the 
Balance  against  the  ostrich  feather,  emblematic  of  "  law," 

"  truth,"  etc.     Above,  twelve  gods,  each  holding  a  sceptre  |, 


The  Weighing  of  the  Heart  235 

are  seated  upon  thrones  before  a  table  of  offerings  of  fruit, 
flowers,  etc.      Their  names  are  : — 

1.  ^C   llj'^  Heru-Khuti    (Harmakhis),    the 

great  god  in  his  boat. 

2.  K^  I v\  Jj        Temu,  the  father  of  the  gods  of 

Anu. 

4.  P«  '^ziy ^  Tefnut,  the  lady  of  heaven. 


5.    ^  J  Jj  Keb,  the  Earth-god. 

6    ^  "^.^37^=^  Nut,  the  Sky-goddess. 

7.  j|     p,^  AsT(Isis),  wife  and  sister  of  Osiris. 


o 


Nebt-Het,    Nephthys,    sister    of 
Osiris. 

^'  ^s  I  I  HoRUS,    the    great    god,    son    of 

Osiris. 

10.  1^1  Ci£^ft         Het-Hert     (Hathor),     lady     of 

Amentet. 

11.  §%^w=J  Hu,  god  of  taste. 


12.  ^m^  j)  Sa,  CTod  of  feelino-. 


The  Balance  is  set  in  the  middle  of  the  Hall.     Upon  the 

beam  sits  the  dog-headed  ape  ^ ,  the  associate  of  Thoth,  the 

"  Lord  of  Khemenu,  the  just  judge,"  ^^3^  zz      .X  i  "^  3  1. 

The  god  Anubis,  jackal-headed,  examines  the  "  tongue  " 
or  pointer  of  the  Balance,  the  suspending  bracket  of  which 
is  in  the  form  of  an  ostrich  feather,  emblematic  of  truth. 
On  the  left  of  the   Balance,  facing  Anubis,  stands  the  god 

Shai  liU  "^  ^ Q  w|  ^  ^^^  represents  Ani's  guardian  angel, 

or  his  luck,  fate,  or  destiny,  and  above  it,  resting  on  a 
small  sepulchral  building,  is  a  rectangular  object,  like  a  slab 

R    2 


236 


The  Papyrus  of  Ani 


or  box,  with  a  human  head. 

1    , 


This  is  probably  the  box  that 
held  Ani's  navel  string,^  j~^.  Behind  these  stand  the 
goddesses  Meskiienet  fUl   ®  «&,  and  Rennt^AA^o^D 

the  former  presided  over  the  birth  of  Ani,  and  the  latter 

acted  as  his  wet-nurse,  or 

foster  mother 


Behind  the 
is  the  soul  of  Ani,  in 
form    of    a    human- 


the    lorm    01     a 

headed  bird  standinof  on  a 

sepulchral   building  called 

"Serekh"  p^S-.    On 

the  right  of  the  Balance, 
behind  Anubis,  stands 
Thoth,  the  self-created, 
self- existent  personifica- 
tion of  the  mind  of  God, 
and  the  inventor  of  writing,  letters,  mathematics,  astronomy, 
and  the  arts.  He  stands  here  as  the  "  Scribe  of  the  gods," 
and  holds  a  reed  pen,  and  a  palette  containing  black  and 
red  inks,  with  which  to  record  the  result  of  the  weighing 
of  the  heart.      Behind  Thoth  stands  the  monster  "  Amam  " 


Fig.  I. 


1^. 


i.e.,   the   "  Devourer,"  or  as   it 


IS  sometimes 
the    "  Eater 


called,   "  Ammit,"  

of  the  dead."  Some  contempo- 
rary papyri  afford  very  interesting 
variants  of  this  scene.  Thus  in 
Fig.  I  the  Judgment  takes  place 
in  a  Hall,  in  the  presence  of  the 
Maati-goddesses  only,  and  the 
heart  is  weighed  against  a  figure 
of  the  goddess  of  Truth  herself. 
The  Ape  of  Thoth  sits  by  the 
side  of  the  Balance,  and  not  on 
the  pillar  of  it.  In  Fig.  2  the 
actual  weighing  is  performed  by  the  goddess  Maat,  whilst 


Fig.  2. 


^  The  preservation  of  the  navel  string  in  Egypt  and  Uganda  is  described 
in  Qoy  Osiris  and  the  Egyptian  Resurrection,  Vol.  II,  p.  95. 


The  Eater  of  the  Dead 


237 


Fig.   3. 


the  monster  Amam  sits  at  her  feet.  The  Ape  of  Thoth 
sits  on  the  left,  and  wears  on  his  head  the  disk  of  the 
moon  and  lunar  horns.  The  head  of  the  pillar  of  the 
Balance  is  in  the  form  of  that  of  Anubis.      In  Fig.   3  the 

Ape  of  Thoth  is  seated  on  the 
pillar  of  the  Balance,  and  it  is 
Horus  who  takes  the  place  of 
Anubis,  and  holds  the  tongue 
of  the  Balance.  In  the  lower 
register  of  this  Vignette  we  see 
Anubis  leading  the  deceased 
into  the  presence  of  Osiris,  and 
presenting  the  heart  of  the  de- 
ceased to  the  god.  The  two 
Apes  seated  by  Osiris  represent 
Thoth  and  Astes. 
The  Eater  of  the  Dead  is  also  called  the  "  Devourer  of 
Amenta."  It  is  a  female  monster  with  the  fore-part  of  a 
crocodile,  the  hind-quarters  of  a  hippopotamus,  and  the  body 

'^  "C   '  -^  ^.   ^  ^^  M^"      ^^  usually  sits  near  the  Balance, 

but  in  one  Vignette  (Fig.  4)  it  is  seen  crouching  by  the 
Lake  of  Fire  in  the  Other  World. 

When  Ani  enters  the 
Hall  of  Maati  to  witness  the 
weighing  of  his  heart,  he  re- 
cites an  address  to  his  heart 
and  a  prayer,  which  together 
form  Chapter  XXXb  of  the 
Book  of  the  Dead.  He  prays 
that  no  false  witness  may  be 
borne  against  him,  and  that 
no  evidence  may  be  produced 
of  a  hostile  character.  He 
prays     that     the     Tchatchau 

\  I  T  '^ ' '  ^'^  Great  Chiefs  of  Osiris,  may  not  oppose  him, 
and  that  the  Shenit  Chiefs  of  the  court  of  Osiris  may  not 
blacken  his  character,  or,  as  the  text  says,  "make  his  name 
to  stink  "  in  the  nostrils  of  the  god  Osiris.  He  prays  also 
that  no  lies  may  be  told  about  him,  and  that  his  heart  may 


Fig.  4. 


238  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

not  be  separated  from  him.  This  pathetic  prayer  is  one  of 
the  oldest  parts  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead,  and  a  tradition 
preserved  in  the  Rubric  of  Chapter  LXIV,  as  found  in  the 
Papyrus  of  Nu,  asserts  that  it  is  as  old  as  the  reign  of 
Menkaura,  a  king  of  the  IVth  dynasty,  who  flourished 
about  3700  B.C.  It  was  used  regularly  down  to  the  end  of 
the  Ptolemaic  Period,  i.e.,  to  the  time  of  the  reign  of 
Cleopatra,  about  30  B.C.,  and  so  we  see  that  the  prayer  was 
current  among  all  classes  of  Egyptians  for  at  least  3500 
years.      It  must  be  one  of  the  oldest  prayers  in  the  world. 

The  heart,  having  been  placed  in  one  of  the  pans  of  the 
Balance,  is  weighed  against  the  ostrich  feather,  emblematic 
of  Truth.  Ani's  guardian  angel  (Shai),  and  his  Heart-soul 
(Ba),  and  his  navel  string  are  all  present  ready  to  bear  their 
testimony  on  behalf  of  their  lord  ;  and  the  goddess  who 
acted  as  midwife  to  his  mother  when  he  was  born,  and  the 
goddess  who  presided  over  his  nursing,  are  prepared  to 
testify  to  his  integrity.  Anubis  examines  the  pointer  of 
the  Balance,  and  the  Ape  of  Thoth  reports  to  Thoth  that 
the  weighing  has  been  carried  out  fairly  and  impartially. 
From  the  Vignette  we  see  that  the  beam  of  the  Balance  is 
exactly  horizontal,  and  that  the  heart  and  the  feather  of 
Maat  exactly  counterbalance  each  other  ;  in  other  words, 
the  heart  is  neither  too  light  nor  too  heavy,  and  thus  the 
demands  of  the  Law  of  Osiris  are  satisfied.  This  being 
done  Thoth  reports  formally  to  the  Company  of  the  Gods 
that  Ani's  heart  has  been  weighed,  that  his  soul  has  borne 
testimony  on  his  behalf,  and  that  his  heart  has  been  found 
right  and  true  by  the  Great  Balance.  Therefore  Ani  is 
sinless.  He  has  not  purloined  any  of  the  property  of  the 
gods  that  was  under  his  charge  officially,  and  he  has  harmed 
none    either    by   word    or   deed.      The  gods    then    accept 

Thoth's  report,  and  declare  that  Ani  is  a  man  true  ^^  and 
right  ]\  and  they  declare  that  he  has  neither  sinned 

against  them  nor  done  harm  to  them  in  any  way.  They 
next  order  that  he  shall  not  be  given  over  to  the  Eater  of 
the  dead,  and  that  he  shall  be  endowed  with  an  estate  in 
Sekhet-hetepet,  with  an  adequate  supply  of  offerings,  and 
with  the  right  to  enter  into  the  presence  of  Osiris.  The 
texts  that  supply  these  facts  make  it  clear  that  the  funda- 
mental demands  of  the    Law    from    a    man  were  that  he 


Osiris  in  Judgment  Enthroned  239 

should:  I.  Speak  the  truth.  2.  Do  no  harm  to  any  man 
by  word  or  deed.  3.  Observe  strict  honesty  in  dealing 
with  the  property  of  others,  whether  it  belonged  to  the 
gods  or  to  men.  4.  Commit  no  sin  against  the  gods,  and 
do  nothing  to  belittle  their  dignity  or  destroy  sacrosanct 
property.  From  many  other  texts,  and  from  inscriptions  of 
all  periods,  it  is  clear  that  what  Osiris  abominated  above  all 
other  things  were  lying,  prevarication,  deceit,  and  insincerity. 
To  him  the  speaker  of  crooked  words  must  necessarily  be 
a  doer  of  crooked  deeds,  and  the  proof  of  this  fact  is  the 
words  maat  kkeru,  "  whose  word  is  truth,"  which  it  was 
the  proud  hope  of  every  Egyptian  to  have  applied  to  him  by 
Thoth,  by  the  gods,  and  by  Osiris  himself,  the  God  of 
Truth.  These  words  are  added  immediately  after  the 
name  of  the  deceased  on  papyri,  stelae,  and  other  sepulchral 
monuments,  and  they  mean  nothing  more  nor  less  than  that 
the  professions  of  right-dealing  and  truth-speaking  made  by 
the  deceased  have  been  tested  by  the  officers  of  the 
Judgment  Hall  of  Osiris,  and  that  he  has  been  found  to  be 
one  whose  word  is  truth,  that  is  to  say,  a  truth-speaker. 
See  the  remarks  made  in  the  Chapter  on  the  Legend  of 
Osiris  in  the  Introduction. 

PLATE    IV 

Vignette  :  In  accordance  with  the  decree  of  the  gods, 
Ani,  whom  they  have  found  right  and  true,  is  brought  into  the 
presence  of  Osiris.  On  the  left  the  hawk-headed  god  Horus, 
the  son  of  I  sis,  wearing  the  Double  Crown  of  the  South  and 
the  North,  takes  Ani  by  the  hand  and  leads  him  forward 

towards  "Osiris,  the   Lord  of  Eternity,"   rjJj^ciT'  Zl,  who 

is  enthroned  on  the  right  within  a  shrine  in  the  form  of 
a  funeral  chest.  The  god  wears  the  Atef  crown  with 
plumes  ;  a  niendt  (see  above  p.  232)  hangs  from  the  back  of 

his  neck  ;  and  he  holds  in  his  hands  the  crook  |  ,  the 
sceptre  1,  and  the  flail   /\,  emblems  of  sovereignty  and 

dominion.  His  body  is  either  painted  with  ochres  of  various 
colours,  or  is  tattooed.  On  the  side  of  his  throne  are  painted 
the  doors  of  a  tomb,  which  proves  that  he  is  sitting  upon 
a   sepulchral   chest  or  coffer  that  is  intended  to  represent 


240 


The  Papyrus  of  Ani 


a  tomb.  I  have  shown  elsewhere^  that  this  throne  probably 
contained  the  genitals,  the  navel  string,  and  perhaps  the 
lower  jawbone  of  the  god.  Behind  Osiris  stand  Nephthys 
on  his  rig-ht  hand  and  I  sis  on  his  left.  Facine  him  and 
standing  on  a  lotus  flower  are  the  Four  Sons  of  Horus, 
who  were  identified  with  the  gods  of  the  cardinal  points. 
The  first,  Kesta  (Mesta),  has  the  head  of  a  man  ;  the 
second,  Hapi,  the  head  of  an  ape  ;  the  third,  Tuamutef, 
the  head  of  a  jackal ;  and  the  fourth,  Qebhsenuf,  the  head 
of  a  hawk.  Suspended  near  the  lotus  is  the  hide  of  an  animal 
from  which  the  head  has  been  cut  off;  in  the  Papyrus  of 
Ani  the  hide  is  that  of  a  pied  cow,  or  bull,  but  in  some 
papyri,  e.g.,  the  Greenfield  Papyrus,  the  animal  is  clearly 
of  the  lynx  class.      In  the  Papyrus  of  Ani  the  hide  is  that 


2  3 

The  Four  Sons  of  Horus. 


of  the  bull  slaughtered  during  the  solemn  ceremonies  that 
were  performed  when  Osiris  was  laid  in  his  tomb.  The 
slaughter  of  this  bull  symbolized  the  slaughter  of  Set,  and 
its  skin  the  skin  of  Set.  Tradition  declared  that  when 
Isis  and  Horus  had  reunited  the  members  of  the  body  of 
Osiris  that  Set  had  scattered,  and  wished  to  revivify  the 
reconstituted  body,  they  wrapped  it  up  in  the  skin  of  the 
cow  or  bull  which  had  been  slain  for  the  funeral  sacrifice. 
This  skin  thus  symbolized  the  human  placenta,  and  when 
Osiris  was  enveloped  in  it  he  received  "  new  life,"  and  his 
exit    therefore    was    regarded    as    his    "  new    birth,"    i.e., 

"  re-birth."     The  skin  was  called  "  Meskhent  "  l]^  ^^^^  ^^, 

or  jn   I      f^^^^,  i.e.,   "birthplace,"  but   later  the  name   was 

given  to  the  tomb  in  general,  and  even   to  the  whole   of 

^  Osiris  and  the  Egyptian  Resurrection,  Vol.  II,  pp.  93  ff. 


The  Shrine  of  Osiris  on  Water 


241 


a  tomb  region,  or  necropolis.^  The  roof  of  the  shrine  is 
supported  by  pillars  with  lotus  capitals,  and  is  surmounted 
by  a  figure  of  Horus-Sept,  or  Horus-Seker,  and  rows  of 
uraei. 

In  the  centre  Ani  kneels  before  the  god  upon  a  reed 
mat,  raising  his  right  hand  in  adoration,  and  holding  in  his 

left   the   kherp    sceptre  V'  emblematic  of  his  high   official 

position  upon  earth.  He  wears  a  wig,  which  appears  to  be 
whitened,  but  the  whiteness  is  probably  intended  to  repre- 
sent the  shining  grease  flowing  from  the  conical  object  on 
the  top  of  his  wig.  This  object  has  already  been  described 
(see  p.  231).  Round  his  neck  is  a  deep  collar  of  precious 
stones.  Near  him  stands  a  table  of  offerings,  of  meat,  fruit, 
flowers,  etc.,  and  in  the  compartments  above  are  a  number 
of  vessels  for  wine,  beer,  oil,  unguents,  etc.,  together  with 
bread,  cakes,  geese,  wreaths,  and  single  flowers. 

In  some  papyri  the  shrine  ot 
Osiris  is  in  the  form  of  a  pylon, 
and  it  usually  rests  upon  a  pedestal 
made  in  the  form  of  ^=1,  i.e.,  the 
object  which  symbolizes  Truth 
i^maat),  or  upon  a  reed  mat.  In 
a  very  interesting  Vignette  in  the 
Papyrus  of  Hunefer  (see  Fig.  i) 
the  throne  of  the  Qod  is  set  either 
upon  or  by  the  side  of  a  lake  of 
water,  from  which  springs  a  lotus 
flower  bearing  upon  it  the  Four 
Sons  of  Horus.      In  the  papyri  of  fig.  i. 

the  XXth  and    XXIst   dynasties 
the  god  Osiris  wears  a  different  kind  of  crown,  and  instead 


of  the  Atef  crown  ^7,  >  ^^  see  on  his  head  that  of  Ptah- 

Seker-Asar    ]}^  ,  a  triune  god  of  the  resurrection. 

On  the  left  of  the  Plate  is  the  address  which  Horus,  the 
son  of  Isis,  makes  to  Osiris  when  he  presents  Ani  to  his 
father.  He  declares  to  Osiris  that  the  weighing  of  the 
heart  of  Ani,  which  the  gods  ordered  Thoth  to  do,  has  taken 


1  See  Moret,  My s teres  Agyptiens,  p.  29 ;  Junker,  Die  Stufidemvachen, 
pp.  5 iff- 


242  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

place,  and  that  the  heart  has  been  found  to  be  "  right "  ; 
further,  it  has  been  pronounced  that  Ani  has  not  committed 
sin  against  any  god  or  any  goddess.  Therefore  Horus 
entreats  Osiris  to  grant  cakes  and  ale  to  Ani,  to  admit  him  into 
his  presence,  and  to  include  him  among  those  deified  human 
beings  who  are  known  as  the  *'  Followers  of  Horus."  On 
the  rieht  of  the  Plate  we  see  Ani  kneeling'  as  he  addresses 
Osiris  and  says  :  "  O  Lord  of  Amentet,  I  am  in  thy  presence. 
"  There  is  no  sin  in  me.  I  have  not  lied  wittingly.  I  have 
"  not  done  auofht  with  a  false  heart."  From  this  we  see 
that  the  only  merit  which  Ani  claimed  before  Osiris  was 
that  he  had  neither  spoken  lies,  nor  acted  lies.  To  him, 
and  to  Osiris  also,  to  tell  the  truth  and  to  act  honestly  was 
the  utmost  that  a  man  could  do  to  prepare  himself  for  a  life 
in  the  Kingdom  of  Osiris.  Therefore  Ani  continues  his 
prayer  and  says  :  "  Grant  thou  that  I  may  be  like  unto  those 
"  favoured  ones  who  are  round  about  thee,  I,  the  Osiris^ 
"  the  greatly  praised  of  the  Beautiful  God,^  and  beloved  of 
"  the  Lord  of  the  Two  Lands.-  1,  the  real  royal  scribe, 
"  loving  him,  Ani,  whose  word  is  truth  before  Osiris."  It 
will  be  noted  that  Ani  does  not  ask  for  sepulchral  offerings, 
or  for  an  estate  in  the  Kingdom  of  Osiris  ;  all  he  asks  is  that 
Osiris  will  consider  him  worthy  to  be  introduced  into  the 
company  of  truthful  Spirit-souls  who  live  always  in  the 
presence  of  Osiris. 

PLATE    V 

Vignettes  :  The  funeral  procession  to  the  tomb : 
runnino-  the  whole  lenofth  of  Plates  V  and  VI.  In  the 
centre  of  Plate  V  the  mummy  of  Ani  is  seen  lying  in  a 
funerary  coffer  or  shrine  mounted  on  a  boat  provided  with 
runners,  which  is  drawn  by  oxen.  At  the  head  and  foot 
of  the  coffer  are  masses  of  flowers  and  branches  of  trees. 
In  the  fore-part  of  the  boat  is  a  painted  wooden  figure  of 
the  goddess  Nephthys,  and  in  the  stern  is  a  similar  figure 
of  I  sis.  Just  behind  I  sis  are  the  two  posts  to  which  are 
fastened  steering  oars,  or  paddles.  By  the  side  of  the 
mummy  kneels  Ani's  wife  Tutu,  with  her  left  hand  raised 

^     \l   A  title  of  the  king  of  Egypt  who  was  reigning  when  the  Papyrus 

of  Ani  was  written. 

2  I.e.,  "  Lord  of  Upper  and  Lower  Egypt." 


Funeral  Procession  Described  243 

to  her  forehead  in  an  attitude  of  lamentation.  Her  arms 
and  shoulders  are  bare,  and  she  wears  a  single  garment 
fastened    about    her  waist.       In  front  of  the    boat    is    the 

Sem  n  ^.^  ^  priest,  arrayed  in  white  linen  garments,  over 

which  he  wears  a  leopard  skin.  The  leopard  was  always 
associated  with  the  Land  of  the  Dead,  and  the  skin  of  the 
animal  was  supposed  to  bestow  upon  its  wearer  special 
powers  in  dealing  with  the  souls  of  the  dead.      In  his  right 

hand  the  Sem  priest  holds  a  libation  vase  u),  from  which  he 

sprinkles  on  the  bier  water  in  which  natron,  or  some  com- 
pound of  salt  or  soda,  has  been  mixed,  and  so  renders  the 
resting-place  of  the  mummy  ceremonially  pure.  In  his  left 
hand  he  holds  over  the  fore-part  of  the  boat  a  censer 
containing  burning  incense,  and,  as  he  sprinkles  the  water 
on  the  boat,  and  causes  the  incense  to  burn  by  moving 
about  the  censer,  he  recites  on  behalf  of  the  deceased 
sections  of  the  text  which  forms  Chapter  I  of  the  Theban 
Recension  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead.  The  prayers  which 
he  recites  for  Ani  entered  into  the  smoke  of  the  incense, 
and  were  carried  by  it  up  to  heaven  and  into  the  ears  of 
Osiris  and  the  other  gods  who  presided  over  the  souls  of 
the  dead,  and  the  Egyptians  always  believed  that  prayers 
so  wafted  to  heaven  were  duly  considered  and  answered  by 
the  gods.  The  bier  is  followed  by  eight  men  who  lament 
the  death  of  Ani,  and  one  of  these  has  his  hair  whitened. 
Behind  these  come  four  men  who  wear  white  tunics  and 
haul  by  means  of  a  rope  a  funerary  chest,  made  in  the  form 
of  a  pylon,  which  rests  upon  runners.  At  each  end  of  the 
coffer  are  small  branches,  and  above  it  is  a  figure  of  the 
Jackal-god  Anubis.      The  side  of  the   coffer  is  decorated 

with  figures  of  the  Tet  and  Tet  uA,  which  symbolize   the 

sacrum  bone  of  Osiris  and  the  uterus  of  I  sis,  and  drew  to 
the  coffer  the  power  of  the  great  Ancestor  god  Osiris,  and 
the  virtue  of  the  blood  and  magical  spells  and  words  of 
power  of  the  great  Ancestress  goddess  I  sis.  The  coffer 
contained  four  vases,  each  of  which  held  an  important 
internal  organ  of  Ani  mummified,  and  was  under  the  divine 
protection  of  one  of  the  Four  Sons  of  Horus.  In  the  rear 
are  two  men,  who  have  their  hands  raised  and  are  reciting 
the  praises  of,  or  prayers  for,  the  deceased. 


244  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

In  the  upper  register  are  :  i.  A  servant  who  carries  in 
his  right  hand  the  staff  of  Ani  and  two  pots  containing 
myrrh  and  unguents.  2.  A  servant  carrying  on  his  head 
Ani's  couch  or  bed,  the  modern  "  Angareb,"  with  a  frame 
of  ebony,  and  a  rope-work  mat  on  which  to  He ;  that 
it  was  a  very  heavy  piece  of  furniture  is  proved  by 
the  bent  knees  of  the  man  who  is  carrying  it.  3.  A 
servant  bearing  on  his  shoulders  the  heavy  ebony  chair 
in  which  Ani  used  to  sit.  4.  A  servant  carrying 
articles     connected     with     Ani's    profession    as    a    scribe, 

namely,   his   palette 


00 


with  the  traces  of 


the  red  and  black  ink  still  upon  it,  and  the  reed  pens 
projecting  from  the  cavity  made  in  it  for  them,  the  scribe's 
wrist   rest,  and  a   box   containing    materials   used    by  the 

scribe,   water-jar,   etc.,  and   another  small  box  Ij.      It  was 

assumed  that  Ani  would  require  all  the  objects  in  the 
Tuat,  or  Khert-Neter,  i.e.,  the  Other  World,  and  they  were 
therefore  beino-  carried  to  his  tomb  in  Western  Thebes. 
Meanwhile,  the  funerary  coffer,  or  bier,  is  being  hauled 
along  by  two  pairs  of  oxen,  which  are  guided  by  four  of 
Ani's  slaves.  The  ropes  are  fastened  round  the  horns  of 
the  animals,  just  as  they  are  in  some  places  in  the  Sudan 
at  the  present  day.  The  oxen  were  intended  to  be  offered 
up  as  sacrifices  during  the  elaborate  funerary  ceremonies 
that  were  performed  either  at  the  door  of  the  tomb,  or  in  the 
great  I'uat  Chamber  inside  it,  wherein  the  transmutation  of 
the  offerings  into  food  suitable  for  the  gods  and  spirits  was 
effected.  The  oxen  were  four  in  number,  so  that  one  might 
be  slaughtered  for  each  of  the  Four  Quarters  of  the  World. 

Text:  Chapter  I.  Here  begin  the  Chapters  of 
Coming  Forth  by  Day. 

PLATE    VI 

Vignette  :  The  funeral  procession  continued  up  to  the 
tomb.  In  the  centre  is  a  group  of  professional  wailing- 
women,  who  are  seen  beating  their  breasts  and  pulling  out 
their  hair.  These  are  followed  by  attendants  or  slaves 
carrying  on  yokes  boxes  of  flowers,  vases  of  unguents,  etc. 
In  front  of  the  women  are  a  cow  and  her  calf,  chairs  made  of 


Ceremony  of  Opening  the  Mouth  245 


painted  wood  with  bunches  of  flowers,  etc.,  upon  them,  and 
an  attendant,  with  shaven  head,  carrying  the  fore-leg  of  an 
ox,  which  has  been  newly  slaughtered.  To  the  right  of  the 
Plate  is  seen  a  group  of  priests  who  are  performing  on  the 
mummy  of  Ani  the  ceremony  of  "  Opening  the  Mouth." 
Ani's  mummy  is  standing  on  a  reed  mat,  and  is  provided 
with  its  festal  decorations,  head-covering,  lotuses  or  lilies, 
beard,  etc.  At  its  feet  kneels  Tutu  lamenting  the  departure 
of  her  husband.  Behind  the  mummy  stands  Anubis,  the 
god  of  embalming,  embracing  it  with  his  arms.  Behind 
Anubis  is  the  tomb,  painted  white.  It  consists  of  a  small 
low,  rectangular  building,  which  in  many  respects  resembles 
a  mastabah  tomb  of  the  Ancient  Empire,  surmounted  by 
a  pyramidal  structure.  About 
half  way  up  the  pyramidal 
portion  is  a  small  opening  or 
niche,  which  was  specially 
made  to  form  a  resting-place 
for  the  Heart-soul  of  Ani, 
whenever  it  wished  to  visit  the 
mummy  in  the  chamber  below 
the  tomb,  or  whenever  it  wished 
to  alight  and  enjoy  the  sight  of 
familiar  people  and  things.  In 
the  accompanying  cut  we  see 
the  soul  descending  the  pit  of 
the  tomb  to  the  mummy  cham- 
ber in  order  to  carry  air  to 
the  mummy. 

A  table  piled  with  the  usual 
offerings  is  in  front  of  Ani's  mummy,  and  standing  there 
^  before  it  we  see  the   Sem  priest,   dressed 
as  before,  and  sprinkling  with  water  and 
censing  the  mummy,  and  another  man,  who 
may  be  Ani's   son   or    an   assistant   priest 

who  bore  the  title  Sa-mer-f  "^^         ,  i.e., 

"  his  loving  son."     This  last-named  holds 
a  remarkable  instrument  called  "  Ur  heka" 


Fig.  I. 


of  power." 


l_J  (Fig.    i),  a   name    which    means 

"great  one  of  spells, "or  "great  one  of  words 
Behind  or  beside  these  priests  on  the  ground 


246 


The  Papyrus  of  Ani 


in  a  row  lie  the  other  instruments  which  are  employed  in 
performing-  the  ceremony  of  "  Opening  the  Mouth  "  of  Ani. 
These  are  the  meskhet  crv,  the  box  for  holdino  uno-uents 
^J,  the  boxes  for  purification  ^E 


,  the  nemes  bandlet 


J 


Fig.  2. 


.  the  libation  vases  uuxj,  the  ostrich  feather,  and  the 
three  instruments  called  Scb-m-,  Temdnu,  and  Pesh-en-kef 
j^.      The  Kher-heb  priest  stands  behind  them  reciting 

the  various  sections  of  the  service  from  a  papyrus.  The 
ceremony  of  "Opening  the  Mouth"  is 
\'ery  ancient,  and  probably  dates  from 
the  end  of  the  Neolithic  Period  in 
Egypt.  It  was  performed  on  the  gods 
after  they  were  created,  and  was  ever 
after  performed  on  all  dead  men  whose 
relatives  could  afford  to  pay  for  the  cere- 
mony. The  Egyptians  foresaw  that 
when  a  man  had  been  made  into  a 
mummy,  if  life  were  restored  to  him  by 
magical  means,  it  would  be  impossible  for  him  to  move  his 
members  because  of  the  bandages  with  which  they  were 
swathed,  and  he  could  not  breathe  because  his  mouth 
would  be  closed  by  swathings  also.  The  priests  therefore 
invented  a  series  of 
ceremonies,  and  com- 
posed a  liturgy  to  be 
recited  whilst  the  cere- 
monies were  being  per- 
formed, the  effect  of 
which  would  be  to 
remove  the  swathings 
from  the  body,  and  to 
permit  it  to  open  the 
mouth  and  nostrils, 
and  to  breathe,  eat, 
drink,  think,  and  walk. 
The  Kher-iieb  priest 
touched  the  mouth  with 
the  series  of  instruments  mentioned  above,  and  so  opened 
it,  and  then  performed  a  number  of  ceremonies  in  which 
all   the  other  objects  played  symbolic  but  very  important 


Fig.  3. 


The  King's  Funerary  Offering  247 

parts.  Sometimes  the  "  Guardian  of  the  balance  "  opened 
the  mouth  of  the  deceased  (Fig.  2).  In  the  Appendix 
which  follows  the  description  of  this  Plate  several  of 
these  ceremonies  are  described,  and  the  outline  drawings 
illustrate  the  way  in  which  they  were  performed.  In 
some  papyri  the  ceremony  of  opening  the  mouth  is 
clearly  shown,  as  will  be  seen  from  the  accompanying 
tracing  (Fig.  3).  One  priest  uses  the  Ur-keka  and  the 
Seb-2cr  on  the  mummy,  another  presents  pots  of  unguent 
for  lubricating  the  lips,  and  the  Kher-heb  purifies  the  place 
where  the  ceremonies  are  being  performed  by  sprinkling 
natron  water,  and  burning  incense.  By  the  side  of  the 
tomb  is  a  large  stele  with  a  rounded  top  which,  it  seems, 
the  Ba-soul  of  the  deceased  was  supposed  to  occupy  at 
times.  On  the  top  of  it  is  a  scene  in  which  the  deceased 
Hunefer  is  represented  adoring  Osiris.  Below  is  the 
followine  text  : — 


^   w  !'  rv/^  A    A    w 


1 1 1 


L^   O    C£    1  I  I    ^  A 


1 


ra 


This  text  opens  with  the  words  Suten  ta  hetep,  meaning 
"the  king  hath  given  an  offering."  This  formula  is  very 
ancient,  and  was  cut  on  stelae  and  tombs  under  the  Ancient 
Empire,  when  no  man  was  allowed  to  build  a  tomb,  or 
have  one  built,  except  by  royal  consent,  and  when  the  king 
did  actually  send  a  contribution  in  kind  to  the  funerary 
offerings.  The  intense  conservatism  of  the  Egyptians 
made  them  preface  their  funerary  inscriptions  by  the 
formula  Suten  ta  hetep  many  centuries  after  the  king 
had  ceased  to  give  gifts  personally  to  the  dead.  There  is 
no  reason  for  doubting  that  every  king  gave  gifts  for  the 
funerary  ceremonies  performed  for  priests  and  officials  who 
were  well  known  and  liked  by  him,  but  it   was  manifestly 


248 


The  Papyrus  of  Ani 


impossible  for  the  kino-  to  contribute  to  the  funeral  of  every 
man  buried  in  a  tomb  throughout  the 
length  and  breadth  of  Egypt.  The 
remaining  part  of  the  inscription  reads : 
"  Osiris,  Khenti  Amentet,  Lord  of 
*'  Eternity,  Creator  everlasting,  Lord 
"  to  whom  praisings  are  made,  First 
"  of  his  Company  of  Gods  ;  hail,  Anpu, 
"  dweller  in  the  mummy  chamber,  great 
"  S^^>  governor  of  the  divine  house  ; 
"  may  they  grant  to  the  Ka  of  the  Osiris, 
"  him  who  is  praised  (or,  favoured)  of 
"  his  god,  Hunefer,  [the  power]  to  go  in 
•'  and  to  come  forth  from  Khert-Neter, 
"and  to  follow  in  the  train  of  Osiris 
"  during  all  his  festivals  of  the  New 
"  Year,  and  to  receive  offerings  of  cakes, 
"  and  to  appear  in  his  presence." 


APPENDIX 


Description  of  the  Ceremonies  of 
Opening  the  Mouth 


The  ceremonies^  which  took  place 
at  the  door  of  the  tomb  in  an  Egyptian 
funeral  are  of  considerable  interest. 
The  priest  called  Kher-heb,  holding 
the  Sem  priest  by  the  arm,  gives  direc- 
tions for  the  slaughter  of  "a  bull  of 
the  South."  The  slaughterer,  standin 
on  the  bull,  cuts  off  a  fore-leg  (Fig.  i 
and  takes  out  the  heart.  A  woman, 
called  the  Tcherdu  ur,  who  personifies 
I  sis,  then  whispers  in  the  deceased's 
ear  :  "  Behold,  thy  lips  are  set  in  order 
for  thee,  so  that  thy  mouth  may  be  opened."      Next,  an 


^  The  following  description  of  them  is  based  upon  the  chapters  on 
this  subject  in  Dumichen,  Der  Grabpalast  des  Fatuamenap,  Part  II, 
Plates  I  ff.,  pp.  3  ff. 


The  Book  of  Opening  the  Mouth  249 


antelope^  and  a  duck-^  are  brought  by  order  of  the  Kher- 
HEB,  and  their  heads  are  cut  off.^  The  Kher-iieb  then 
addresses  the  Sem  priest  :  "  I  have  seized  them  for  thee, 
"  I  have  brought  unto  thee  thine  enemies.  His  hands 
"  bring  his  head  [as]  his  gift.  I  have  slain  them  for  thee, 
"  O  Tmu  ;  let  not  his  enemies  rise  up  against  this  god." 

The  slaughterer  then  presents  the  thigh  to 

the  Kher-iieb,  and  the  heart  to  an  official 

whose  title  was  Smer  M  T  hS,  and  all  three 

then  "  place  the  thigh  and  the  heart  upon 
the  ground  before  this  god"  {i.e.,  Osiris). 
The  Kher-heb  then  says  to  the  deceased, 
represented  by  his  mummy  or  statue  :   "I 

*  have  brought  unto  thee  the  thigh  (Fig.  2) 

*  as  the  Eye  of  Horus.  I  have  brought 
'  unto  thee  the  heart ;  let  there  be  no  rising 
'  up    against   this    god.      I    have   brought 

'  unto  thee  the  antelope,  his  head  is  cut  off ;   I  have  brought 

*  unto    thee    the    duck,    his   head   is   cut  off"      Here   the 

sacrifice  ends. 

The  next  part  of  the  ceremony, 
i.e.,  "  the  opening  of  the  mouth  and 
eyes,"  is  performed  by  the  Sem  priest, 
who  addresses  the  deceased  :  "  I  have 
"  come  to  embrace  thee,  I  am  thy 
"  son  Horus,  I  have  pressed  thy 
"mouth;  I  am  thy  son,  I  love  thee. 
"His  mother  beats  her  breast  and 
"  weeps  for  him,  and  those  who  are 
"  in  chains  with  him  {i.e.,  Isis  and 
"  Nephthys)  beat  their  breasts.  Thy 
"  mouth  was  closed,  but  I   have  set  in  order  for  thee  thy 


Fig.  2. 


Fig.  3. 


3  The  slaughter  of  the  antelope  and  duck  typified  the  destruction  of 
the  enemies  of  the  deceased  ;  for,  when  Horus  destroyed  the  enemies  of 
his  father  Osiris,  "  he  cut  off  their  heads  [which  took]  the  form  of  ducks  in 
"  the  sky,  making  them  to  fall  headlong  to  the  ground  in  the  form  of 
"  antelopes,  and  into  the  water  in  the  form  of  fishes."  For  the  text,  see 
Schiaparelli,  //  Libro  dei  Funeralt  degli  Antichi  Egiziani  (in  Atti  della 
R.  Accadetnia  dei  Lined;  Rome,  1883  and  1890),  p.  94;  Naville, 
Todtenbuch,  chap.  134. 

VOL.  I.  S 


250 


The  Papyrus  of  Ani 


Fig.  4. 


"  mouth ^  and  thy  teeth."  The  Kiier-heb  next  calls  on  the 
Sem  priest  four  times  :  "  O  Sem,  take  the  Seb-tir-  (Fig.  3) 
and  open  the  mouth  and  the  eyes  " ;  and  while  the  Sem  priest 
is  performing  the  ceremony  the  Kher-heb  continues  :  "  Thy 
"  mouth  was  closed,  but  I  have  set  in 
'  "  order  for  thee  thy  mouth  and  thy  teeth. 

"  I  open  for  thee  thy  mouth,  I  open  for 
*'  thee  thy  two  eyes,  I  have  opened  for 
"  thee  thy  mouth  with  the  instrument  of 
"  Anubis.  I  have  opened  thy  mouth 
"  with  the  instrument  of  Anubis,  with 
*'  the  iron  tool  with  which  the  mouths 
"  of  the  gods  were  opened.  Horus,  open 
"  the  mouth,  Horus,  open  the  mouth. 
"  Horus  hath  opened  the  mouth  of  the 
"  dead,  as  he  whilom  opened  the  mouth  of 
"  Osiris,  with  the  iron  which  came  forth  from  Set,  with  the 
"  iron  tool  (Fig.  4)  with  which  he  opened  the  mouths  of  the 
"  gods.  He  hath  opened  thy  mouth  with  it.  The  dead 
"  shall  walk  and  shall  speak,  and  his  body  shall  [be]  with 
"  the  Great  Company  of  the  Gods  in  the  Great  House  of  the 
"  Aofed  one  in  Anu,  and  he  shall  receive  there  the  ureret 
"  crown  from  Horus,  the  lord  of 
"  mankind."  The  Kher-heb  next 
says  :  "  Let  the  Ami-Khent  priest 
"  (Fig.  5)  stand  behind  him  {i.e.,  the 
"  deceased),  and  say,  '  My  father,  my 
"  father,'  four  times."  The  eldest  son 
of  the  deceased  then  stands  behind 
the  deceased,  and  in  his  name  the 
Kher-i^eb  says :  "His  mother  beateth 
"  her  breast  and  weepeth  for  him, 
"  and  those  who  are  in  chains  with 
*'  him  also  beat  their  breasts."  An- 
other priest,  called  Am-Khent-Heru,  takes  up  the  same 
position    and    says  :    "  Isis    goeth    unto    Horus,    who    em- 

^  See  Schiaparelli,  //  Libro  dti  Funerali  degli  Antichi  Egtziani ; 
Maspero,  Le  Riinel  du  Sacrifice  Funirairc  (in  Revue  de  VHistoire  des 
Religions,  1887,  pp.  159  ff.). 


Fig.  5. 


Vk: 


^^ 


For    a   complete    list   of   these    instruments,    see 


Schiaparelli,  //  Libro  dei  Funerali  degli  Antichi  Egiziani,  p.  109. 


The  Book  of  Opening  the  Mouth  251 


Fig.  6. 


braceth  his  father."  A  priestly  official  belonging  to  the 
mesenti  class  then  goes  behind  the  deceased,  and  the 
Sem,  Smer  and  Kher-heb  priests  stand  in  front,  and  the 
Sem  priest  and  the  Kher-heb,  personifying  Horus  and  Sut, 
respectively  cry  :   "  I  am   Horus,  I   am  Sut  ;   I  will  not  let 

"  thee    illumine    the 

"  head  of  my  father." 
The  Sem  priest  then 
leaves  the  KA-chapel 
and  returns,  leading 
in  the  Sa-mer-f,  i.e., 
"  the  son  who  loveth 
him";  whereupon  the 
Kher-heb  says:  "O 
"  Sem,  let  the  Sa- 
"  MER-F  come  into  the  tomb  in  order  that  he  may  see  the 
"god."  The  Sem  priest  holding  him  by  the  arm  then 
leads  forward  the  Sa-mer-f,  who  addresses  the  deceased  : 
"  I  have  come  ;  I  have  brought  unto  thee  thy  son  who 
"  loveth  thee ;  he  shall  open  for  thee  thy  mouth  and 
"  thine  eyes."  (Fig.  6.)  A  tomb-official,  A^n-ds,  then 
takes  up  his  position  behind  the  deceased,  and  the  Sa- 
mer-f  and  the  Kher-heb  stand  in  front ;  the  Kher-heb 
repeating  four  times  :  "The  Sa-mer-f  openeth  the  mouth 
"  and  the  two  eyes  of  the  deceased,  first  with  a  needle  ^  of 
"  iron,  then  with  a  rod  oi sniu  metal  ";  the  A?n-ds  addressing 
the  deceased  :  "  Behold  the  Sa-mer-f  "  ;  and  the  Kher-heb 
. saying,  in  the  name  of  the  Sa- 
mer-f  :  "  I  have  pressed  for  thee 
' '  thy  mouth,  even  as  thy  father 
"  pressed  it  in  the  name  of  Seker. 
"  Hail,  Horus  hath  pressed  thy 
"  mouth  for  thee,  he  hath  opened 
"  thine  eyes  for  thee  ;  Horus  hath 
"  opened  thy  mouth  for  thee,  he 
"  hath  opened  for  thee  thine  eyes : 
"  they  are  firmly  stablished.  Thy 
"  mouth  was  closed  ;  I  have  or- 
"  dered  thy  mouth  and  thy  teeth  for  thee  in  their  true 
"  order.     Thou   hast    [again]   opened    thy   mouth ;    Horus 


Fig.  7. 


^'eUef. 


S    2 


252 


The  Papyrus  of  Ani 


Fig.  8, 


"  hath  opened  thy  mouth.  I  have  stablished  thy  mouth 
"  firmly,  Horus  hath  opened  for  thee  thy  mouth,  Horus 
"  hath  opened  for  thee  thy  two  eyes." 
The  Kher-heb  then  speaks  on  behalf 
of  the  Sem  priest  :  "  Thy  mouth  was 
"  closed  up.  I  have  ordered  aright  for 
"  thee  thy  mouth  and  thy  teeth.  Thy 
mouth  is  firmly  stablished.  Thy  mouth 
was  tightly  closed.  His  mouth  is 
"  firmly  stablished,  and  [his]  two  eyes 
"  are  firmly  stablished."  The  Sem  priest 
next  presents  to  the  deceased  (Fig.  7)  a 

cone-shaped  offering  A  ,^  and  at  the  same 

time  the  Kher-heb  says :   "  Open  the  mouth  and  the  two 

"  eyes,  open  the  mouth  and 

"  the  two  eyes.     Thou  hadst 

"  tightly   closed  thy   mouth, 

"  thou  hast   [again]  opened 

"  thy  two  eyes."     Then  the 

Kher-heb  says  on  behalf  of 

the  Smer  (Fig.  8)  priest  who 

stands  behind  the  deceased  : 

"  One  cometh  unto  thee  for 

thy  purification."     Next  the 

Sa-mer-f  comes  forward  with 

four  boxes  (Fig.  9)  in  his  hands,  and  the  Kher-heb  says  : 

"  O  Sa-mer-f,  take  the  four  boxes 
"  of  purification,  press  the  mouth 
"  and  the  two  eyes,  and  open  the 
"  mouth  and  the  two  eyes  with 
"  each  of  them  four  times,  and 
"  say,  '  Thy  mouth  and  thy  two 
"  eyes  are  firmly  stablished,  and 
"  they  are  restored  aright,'  and 
"  say  also,  '  I  have  firmly  pressed 
"  thy  mouth,  I  have  opened  thy 
"  mouth,  I  have  opened  thy  two 

*'  eyes  by  means  of  the  four  boxes  of  purification.' "     The 

Sem  priest  then  approaches  the  deceased  (Fig.  10)  with  the 


Fig.  9. 


Fig.  10. 


^  A  large  collection  of  such  offerings  is  exhibited  in  the  Third  Egyptian 
Room. 


The  Book  of  Opening  the  Mouth  253 


Fig.  II. 


instrument  ^,^  and  the  Kher-heb  at  the  same  time  says  : 
"  O  Sem  priest,  lay  the  pesh-en-kef  upon  his  mouth,  and 
"  say,  '  I  have  stablished  for  thee  thy  two  jaw-bones  in 
"  thy  face  which  was  divided  into  two  parts.'  "  The  Sem 
priest  next  makes  an  offering  of 
grapes  (Fig.  11),  the  Kher-heb 
saying  :  "  O  Sem  priest,  place  the 
"  grapes  upon  his  mouth  and  say, 
"  '  He  bringeth  to  thee  the  eye  of 
"  Horus,  he  graspeth  it ;  do  thou 
"  also  grasp  it.'"  After  an  ostrich 
feather  has  been  offered  (Fig.  12) 
by  the  Sem  priest,  and  a  number 
of  the  ceremonies  described  above 
have  been  repeated,  and  other 
animals  slaughtered,  the  Kher-heb  addresses  the  Sem 
priest,  and  says:  "Take  the  instrument  Tun-tet'^  (thrice) 
and  open  the  mouth  and  the  eyes"  (four  times).  He  then 
continues:  "O  Sem  priest,  take  the  iron  instrument  of 
"  Anubis,  Tun-tet  (thrice).  Open  the  mouth  and  the  two 
"  eyes  (four  times),  and  say,  '  I  open 
"  for  thee  thy  mouth  with  the  iron 
"  instrument  of  Anubis  with  which  he 
"  opened  the  mouths  of  the  gods. 
"  Horus  openeth  the  mouth,  Horus 
"  openeth  the  mouth,  Horus  openeth 
"  the  mouth  with  the  iron  which  cometh 
"  forth  from  Set,  wherewith  he  hath 
"  opened  the  mouth  of  Osiris.  With 
"  the  iron  tool  {ineskket)  wherewith  he 
"  opened  the  mouths  of  the  gods  doth 
"  he  open  the  mouth.  He  [the  deceased]  shall  go  in  and 
"  he  shall  speak  [again],  and  his  body  shall  dwell  with  the 
"  Company  of  the  Great  Gods  in  Anu,  wherein  he  hath 
"  received  the  ureret  crown  from  Horus,  lord  of  men.  Hail, 
"  Horus  opened  thy  mouth  and  thy  two  eyes  with  the 
"  instrument  Seb-ur  or  Teman^^\x\\  the  instrument  Tun-tet 


Fig.  12. 


1  It  is  called  Pesh-en-kef  ,-^  ^-^^  ^^  ^ . 
Grabpalast  des  Fatuamenap,  Part  I,  pp.  i8,  19. 


See   Diimichen,  Der 


2     " '        I 


254 


The  Papyrus  of  Ani 


Fig.  13. 


"  of  the  Opener  of  the  Roads  [i.e.,  Anubis)  wherewith  he 
"  opened  the  mouth  of  all  the  gods  of  the  North.  Horus 
"the  Great  ^  cometh  to  embrace  thee.  I,  thy  son  who 
"  loveth  thee,  have  opened  thy  mouth  and  thy  two  eyes. 
"His  mother  beateth  herbreast  in  grief  while  she  embraceth 

"  him,  and  the  two  sisters  {i.e.,  Isis 
"  and  Nephthys),  who  are  one, 
"  strike  themselves  in  grief  All 
"  the  gods  open  thy  mouth  accor- 
"  ding  to  the  book  of  the  service.'  " 
The  Kher-heb  next  instructs  the 
Sem  priest  to  clothe  the  mummy 
or  statue  of  the  deceased  with  the 
nejjies^  band  or  fillet  (Fig.  13),  and 
to  say  :  "  Lo  !  the  nemes  fillet,  the 
"  nefjies  fillet,  which  cometh  as  the 
"  light,  which  cometh  as  the  light  ;  it  cometh  as  the  eye 
"  of  Horus,  the  brilliant  ;  it  cometh  forth  from  Nekheb. 
"  The  gods  were  bound  therewith  ;  bound  round  is  thy 
"  face  with  it  in  its  name  oi  Hetch  [i.e.,  light,  or  brilliance), 
"  coming  forth  from  Nekheb.  All  that  could  do  harm 
"  to  thee  upon  earth  is  destroyed."  The  Sem  priest, 
holding  a  vase  of  ointment  in  his  left  hand,  and  smearing 
the  mouth  with  his  fore-finger  (Fig. 
14),  says  :  "  I  have  anointed  thy  face 
"  with  ointment,  I  have  anointed 
"  thine  eyes.  I  have  painted  thine 
"  eye  with  natch  and  with  7n€stchem. 
"  May  no  ill-luck  happen  through 
"  the  dethronement  of  his  two  eyes 
"  in  his  body,  even  as  no  evil  for- 
"  tune  came  to  Horus  through  the 
"  overthrow  of  his  eye  in  his  body. 
"  Thy  two  eyes  are  decked  there- 
"  with  in  its  name  of  Uatch,  which  maketh  thee  to  give  forth 
"  fragrance,  in  its  name  of  Sweet-smelling."  A  number  of 
scented  unguents  and  perfumes  are  brought  forward,  and  at 
the  presentation  of  each  a  short  sentence  is  recited  by  the 


Fig.  14. 


^  Heru-ur,  the  Haroeris  of  the  Greeks. 


The  Book  of  Opening  the  Mouth  255 

Kher-heb,  having  reference  to  the  final  triumph  of  the 
deceased  in  the  Underworld  and  to  the  help  which  the 
great  gods  will  render  to  him. 

Text :  [Chapter  I.]  Here  begin  the  Chapters  of 
Coming  Forth  by  Day,  and  the  songs  of  praise  and 
glorifying,  and  of  coming  forth  from  and  of  going  into 

THE  GLORIOUS   KhERT-NeTER   IN    THE    BeAUTIFUL  AmENTET. 

This  is  the  opening  Chapter  of  the  Theban  Recension 
of  the  Book  of  the  Dead,  and  its  object  is  clear.  It 
was  to  be  recited  on  the  day  of  the  funeral,  and  if  this 
were  done  by  the  Kher-heb  priest  it  would  give  the 
deceased  power  to  leave  the  Other  World  whensoever  he 
pleased,  and  to  return  to  this  world,  and  to  resume  his  place 
in  the  Other  World  when  he  was  tired  of  this  one.  The 
words  "  coming  forth  by  day  "  have  formed  the  subject  of 
many  discussions  by  Egyptologists,  and  they  have  been 
translated  in  many  ways,  e.g.,  "  Coming  forth  from  [or,  as] 
the  day"  (Birch)  ;  "  The  departure  from  the  day  "  (Birch) ; 
"  Sortir  du  jour"  (Deveria  and  Naville) ;  "Sortie  de  la 
journ^e  "  (Pierret)  ;  "  Ausgang  bei  Tage  "  (Brugsch).  The 
true  meaning  seems  to  me  to  be  "  Coming  forth  by  (or  into) 
the  day."  Ap  the  events  described  in  the  Book  of  the 
Dead  take  place  in  the  Other  World,  and  what  the  dead 
man  craved  for  above  everything  else  was  to  come  back  into 
the  light  of  day  of  this  world.  He  longed  to  have  the 
power  to  leave  Khert-Neter,  or  Amentet,  i.e.,  the  Other 
World,  whensoever  he  wished,  and  to  return  to  it  whenso- 
ever he  wished.  There  was  no  other  place  for  him  to  go 
to  except  this  earth,  or  the  sky  above  it,  and  as  he  firmly 
believed  that  the  Other  World  was  a  place  of  semi-darkness, 
as  compared  with  this  earth  when  the  sun  was  shining  in 
the  sky,  he  longed  to  have  the  power  to  come  back  to  earth 
and  bask  in  the  sunshine,  or  in  the  glorious  light  of  the  full 
moon.  Every  Egyptian  knew  that  only  the  gods  possessed 
naturally  the  power  to  leave  the  Other  World  at  will,  and 
he  therefore  strove  with  all  his  might  to  find  the  means 
whereby  he  might  identify  himself  with  them  or  become 
absorbed  in  them.  In  this  Chapter  the  priest  declared 
that  the  deceased  was  the  Sun-god,  and  Thoth,  and  a 
Tchatcha  chief,  and  the  kinsman  of  Osiris  and  Horus,  and 
Tet,  and  the  Sem  priest,  and  that  he  had  assisted  Horus  in 


256  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

performing  the  ceremonies  which  had  resulted  in  the  resur- 
rection of  Osiris.  As  Osiris  confounded  his  enemies,  so 
the  deceased  has  confounded  his  enemies  ;  as  Thoth  proved 
the  words  of  Osiris  to  be  true,  so  also  does  he  prove  that 
the  words  of  Ani  are  truth.  Ani  also  claims  to  have 
performed  the  priestly  duties  of  the  Sem  priest  and  of  Ptah, 
and  to  have  ploughed  the  earth  in  Hensu  (Herakleopolis), 
and  to  have  worked  into  it  the  blood  of  his  slauohtered 
enemies,  just  as  did  Horus  for  his  father  Osiris.  Having 
performed  all  these  meritorious  acts  and  been  declared 
innocent  in  the  Judgment,  he  demands  admission  into  the 
presence  of  Osiris,  and  the  right  to  hear  and  see  what  the 
gods  hear  and  see,  and  to  stand  up  and  sit  down  as  they  do. 

It  was  not,  however,  easy  to  reach  the  House  of 
Osiris,  for  it  was  situated  far  away  from  this  earth,  on  the 
remote  side  of  Dead-land.  A  soul  might  easily  lose  its 
way  in  trying  to  cross  that  awful  country,  or  it  might  be 
molested  and  driven  back  by  hostile  souls,  or  by  those 
souls  who  could  never  hope  to  win  through  to  the  kingdom 
of  Osiris.  The  only  certain  means  of  traversing  Dead-land 
in  safety  was  to  obtain  the  services  of  some  benevolent  god, 
or  ofods,  who  knew  the  roads,  and  could  act  therefore  as 
trustworthy  guides  to  the  souls  who  wished  to  reach  the 
Elysian  Fields.  Hence  we  find  Ani  praying  to  the 
"openers  of  the  ways,"  or  divine  guides,  to  lead  him  to 
the  House  of  Osiris,  and  to  protect  him  from  the  evil 
actions  of  those  who  might  attempt  to  turn  him  out  of  his 
path,  and  make  him  to  lose  his  way  "  in  the  bush."  Such 
"  guides  "  were  the  servants  of  Osiris,  and  they  would  only 
conduct  the  souls  of  the  loyal  followers  of  Osiris  to  their 
lord,  and  it  was  necessary  for  souls  to  convince  them  that 
they  really  were  followers  of  Osiris  by  reciting  the  words  of 
power  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead,  or  by  producing  authorized 
amulets.  When  this  had  been  done  the  guides  led  the  souls 
of  the  beatified  through  Dead-land,  and  helped  them  to  pass 
through  the  fortresses  of  Osiris  in  safety  until  they  entered 
the  presence  of  the  god. 

According  to  a  supplementary  text,  which  is  known  as 
the  "  Chapter  of  making  the  Sakii  to  enter  into  Khert- 
Neter  on  the  day  of  the  funeral,"  the  road  between  this 
world  and  the  next  was  infested  with  snakes,  "  which  lived 
"  upon  the  bodies  of  men  and  women  and  fed  upon  their 


Ani  and  Tutu  in  the  Other  World 


257 


"  blood."  In  the  recendy  discovered  Papyrus  of  luaa  these 
snakes  are  said  to  be  nine  in  number,  and  their  names  are 
as  follow  : — 


II   o 


'■  Llk^J^»- 


3-f 


^ 


Narti-ankh-em-sen-f. 

Her-f-em-qeb-f. 

Ankh-em-fentu. 


^ a 


5-  ra^iTij-,, 


Sam-em-qesu. 

^jTl^"m-{[-_^'^|m  Hahutiamsau  (?) 

Shept-temesu. 
Unem-sahu. 


^•^i!^]fti^ 


Sam-em-snef. 


I IM  Ankh-em-betu-mitu.^ 


9-  fTkJ-^^K 


PLATE  VII 

The  Vignettes  which  run  along  the  tops  of  Plates  VII-X 
all  illustrate  the  XVIIth  Chapter  of  the  Theban  Recension, 
the  text  of  which  is  written  below  them. 

Vignettes  :  I.  Ani  and  his  wife  Tutu  seated  in  a  bower 
or  chamber,  which  appears  to  be  made  of  mats,  stiffened 
and  supported  by  poles.  Ani  is  seated  on  a  chair  with  a 
back,  and  is  engaged  in  moving  a  piece  on  a  chequer-board 
with  his  right  hand  ;  in  his  left  he  holds  an  object  made  of 
linen,  the  use  and  signification  of  which  are  unknown. 
Tutu  is  seated  a  little  behind  her  husband  on  a  stool,  which 
is  provided  with  a  cushion  ;  the  feet  of  both  husband  and 
wife  rest  on  footstools  made  of  matting,  or  perhaps  on 
leather-covered    cushions.       In    the     Papyrus    of    Hunefer 


^  See  Budge,   TAe    Chapters  of  Coming  Forth  by  Day,  Vol.  I,  Plate 
LXXXVIII,  London,  1909. 


258 


The  Papyrus  of  Ani 


(Fig.  i)  we  see  one  figure  of  the  deceased  seated  in  the 
seh  chamber,  and  two  outside  it,  with  the  emblem  of 
Amentet    and    symbols   of  bread  and  beer  between  them. 

One  of  the  two  out- 
side fio-ures   is  croinor 
into  the  seh  chamber 
and  the  other  is  leav- 
ing it.      In  the  Papy- 
rus   of    Mut-em-uaa 
the  queen  (Fig.  2)  is 
seated  before  a  table 
with  a  box  of  unguent 
on  it,  and  she  is  play- 
inor  a  orame  on  a  drauoht  board.      Her  Heart-soul  stands 
outside,  and  is  adoring  the  two  Horus-gods,  or  the  gods  of 
the  rising  and  setting  sun. 

2.  The  Heart-souls  of  Ani  and  Tutu,  in  the  form  of 
human-headed  hawks,  standing  upon  the  roof  of  their  tomb  ; 
before  each  is  a  pot  in  which  incense  is  burning.     Above 


Fig.  I. 


the  head  of  Ani  is  the  legend 


i^ 


the  Ba-soul  of 


Fig.  2. 


the  Osiris  "  [Ani]. 

3.  A  light  table,  or  altar,  with  a  pillared  stand,  on  which 

rests  a  vase 

with  a  spout 
■vQ,  probably 
containing 
wine.  On 
the  table  are 
two  lotuses 
or  lilies. 
These  ob- 
jects probably  represent  the  offerings  which  were  made  to 
Ani  and  Tutu  by  their  kinsfolk  upon  earth. 

4.  Two  lions  seated  back  to  back  and  supporting  the 
horizon  qS^,  over  which  extends  the  sky  f=^.  The  lion  on 
the  right  is  called  Sep  R  "^  r^.  ^-^m  "  Yesterday,"  and  that 

on  the  left  Tuau  ^^^^o.  ^•^•'   "To-day"   (to  illustrate 
11.  13-16).  .^ 

5.  The  Benu  bird  \  '^^^^  vS  ^^^ ,  with  a  libation  vase  and 
lotus   resting  on  an  altar  before  him.     The  Benu  bird  is 


Yesterday  and  To-day 


259 


usually  thought  to  be  identical  with  the  phoenix  of  the 
Greeks,  who  considered  that  bird  to  have  been  self-produced. 
The  Benu  is  at  once  a  symbol  of  Ra  and  of  Osiris. 

6.  The  mummy  of  Ani  lying  on  a  bier  within  a  funerary 
coffer  or  shrine,  to  the  ends  of  which  are  attached  coloured 
streamers ;  the  bier  rests  on  the  roof  of  a  long,  low 
sepulchral  building  that  is  probably  intended  to  represent 
Ani's  tomb.     At  the  head  and  foot  of  the  bier  is  a  vulture, 

that  at  the  head  representing  Nephthys  |T,  and  that  at  the 
foot  Isis  jl;  these  birds  are  the  two  goddesses  in  the 
character  of  "  nursing  mothers,"  Tcherti,     B^   ^ .    Beneath 

the  bier  are  two  vases  of  unguents,  Ani's  palette,  the  box 
containing  implements  used  in  writing  and  painting,  and 
two  wooden  or  stone  vessels  painted  in  imitation  of 
variegated  glass.  Examples  of  such  vases  are  to  be  seen 
in  the  Fourth  Egyptian 
Room  of  the  British  Mu- 
seum, Nos.  4875,  4877, 
4879,  etc.  In  some 
papyri  (see  annexed  cut) 
the  Heart-soul  of  the 
deceased  is  seen  hovering 
over  the  mummy  in  the 

form  of  a  human-headed  ~~~~ 

hawk,  bearing  in  its  claws  the  emblem  of  the  sun's  orbit 
[s/ien),  which  symbolizes  eternity.  The  older  and  more 
correct  form  of  the  s/ien  is  ciDi ,  but  here  it  is  shortened, 
and  resembles  a  signet  ring. 

7.  From  other  papyri  we  see  that  after  the 
Vignette  of  Ani's  mummy  we  ought  to  find  in 
our  papyrus  a  Vignette  representing  the  two 
Uraei-goddesses  who  are  referred  to  in  11.  33-36 
of  the  text.  They  are  here  supplied  from 
the  Papyrus  of  Hunefer,  in  which  the  legends 
tell  us  that  one  uraeus  represents  the  goddess  of 
the  South,  Nekhebit,  and  the  other  the  goddess 
of  the  North,  Uatchit. 


26o  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 


PLATE  VIII 


8.  The  figure  of  a  god,  painted  dark  blue,  or  cobalt,  and 
marked  with  wavy  lines  to  indicate  his  nature  as  a  Water- 
god.  He  wears  the  long  characteristic  African  beard,  and 
has  a  somewhat  pendulous  stomach.  His  androgynous 
nature  is  indicated  by  his  left  breast,  which  is  that  of  a 
woman.  On  his  head  is  the  symbol  for  "  year,"  and  in  his 
right  hand  he  holds  a  similar  symbol  ;  he  is  called  "  Heh- 

en-renput  "  ^  '  rjf»  and  he  may  be  a  primitive  Egyptian 

or  Nilotic  Year-god.      His  left  hand  is  extended  over  an 
oval  within  which  is  the  Eye  of  Horus  ^  (to  illustrate  1.  46). 

9.  The  god   "  whose   name  is    Uatch-t-ura " 


c^ 


^^=f  n  A/wwv  jO  „,^,^  ^  {^^^  the  god  of  the  Great  Green,  or  the 

god  of  the  Sea,  whether  of  the  Red  Sea  or  of  the  Medi- 
terranean cannot  be  said.  He  is  painted  red,  wears  armlets 
and  bracelets,  and  has  round  his  waist  a  girdle,  the  ends  of 
which  fall  down  in  front  of  him.  His  arms  are  extended, 
and  his  hands  are  stretched  out  over  two  rectangular  lakes 
MSB  ;    that   under  his  right  hand  is  called  She-en-hesmen, 

WAAA  0   1  11°,  i.e.,  "  Lake  of  Natron,"  and  that  under 


his  left,  She-en-maat,  >^^'^^  -*N^  VN,        ,  i.e.,  "  Lake 

of  Salt."  This  god  seems  to  be  of  androgynous  nature 
also,  for  his  left  breast,  like  that  of  the  god  in  Vignette  8, 
is  that  of  a  woman  (to  illustrate  11.  47-50). 

10.   A  doorway  in  the  form  of  a  pylon,  with  palm-leaf 
cornice,  and   two   leaves   which   are  shut  and  bolted  ;    its 

name  is  Rasta,  or  Rastau  ~^,  which  means  the 

I     — ^  f^-^^^ 

"  door  of  the  corridors  in  the  mountain."  This  Vignette 
illustrates  11.  51  ff.,  from  which  we  learn  that  it  is  the 
south  gate  of  Anrutef,  a  district  of  Herakleopolis,  and  the 
northern  gate  of  the  Land  of  the  Dead.  The  name  was 
given  originally  to  a  gate  in  the  kingdom  of  Seker,  the  god 
of  Death,  which  lay  to  the  south  of  Memphis.  In  any  case 
it  is  the  gate  which  all  souls  must  pass  through  on  It-aving 
this  world  to  enter  the  Tuat,  or  Other  World,  and  a  picture 
of  it  is  given  here  so  that  souls  may  gain  an  idea  of  what  it 
was  like. 


Mehurt,  the  Sky-goddess 


261 


11.  A  funerary  building,  painted  white,  with  a  palm- 
leaf  cornice.  The  door  is  unlike  that  of  Rasta.  Above  is 
the  Right  Eye  of  Ra,  which  is  supposed  to  rise  up  out  of 
the  building.  This  building  probably  represents  the  door 
through  which  the  sun  emerges  at  sunrise,  when  he  starts 
on  his  journey  across  the  heavens  (to  illustrate  1.  jT))- 

12.  A   very   ancient  Sky-goddess  called  "  Mehurt  arit 


Ra" 


°^ 


i.e.,   "  Mehurt,  the  daughter 


Fig.  I. 


of  Ra."  Her  face  is  yellow 
and  her  body  red.  She  has 
a  deep  collar,  or  halter,  round 
her  neck,  to  which  is  fastened 
a  mendt,  emblem  of  virility, 
fecundity,  and  female  sexu- 
ality, which  lies  along  her 
back  (Fig.  i).  Above  her 
back  is  a  flail.  She  lies  along 
the  top  of  a  low  building, 
which  rests    on    a  mat.      In 

the  Papyrus  of  Hunefer  (Fig.  2)  we  see  the  god  Thoth 
kneeling  before  her  and  presenting  to  her  the  Eye  of  Ra, 
or  the  Sun.  The  allusion  here  is  to  the  ancient  legend 
in  which  it  is  said  that  Set  carried  away  the  sun  from  the 

sky  and  attempted  to  destroy 
it.  Thoth  set  out  in  quest  of 
the  sun,  overtook  Set,  and 
having  inflicted  great  injury 
upon  him,  took  the  sun  and 
carried  it  back  and  placed  it 
in  the  sky,  in  its  proper  place 
(to  illustrate  11.  75-79). 
13.   A  funeral  chest  or  coffer  which  represents  the  burial 

ground  or  the  great  cemetery  of  Abydos  H==l  ^  T  J 
The  supports  and  domed  cover  of  the  coffer  are  painted 
green  and  red,  and  the  side  is  black.  On  this  are  traced 
in  outline  the  figures  of  the  Four  Sons  of  Horus,  Kesta 
(Mesta)  and  Hapi  facing  Tuamutef  and  Qebhsenuf.  Above 
the  cover  rise  the  head  of  a  man,  presumably  that  of  Ani, 
and  his  forearms  and  hands,  in  each  of  which  he  grasps  the 

symbol  of  "  life  "  ■¥• .    It  was  at  Abydos  that  Osiris  arose  from 


Fig.  2. 


262  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

the  dead,  and  it  is  suggested  by  this  Vignette  that  Ani  will 
rise  there  also.  This  coffer  is  supposed  to  contain  the 
internal  organs  of  the  deceased,  which  are  under  the  pro- 
tection of  the  Four  Sons  of  Horus.  On  the  left  of  the 
coffer  stand   two  of  the   Sons    of  Horus,    Kesta  (Mesta) 

^^^  jl  (j  ^,  man-headed,  and  Hapi,  or  Hepi  v  (1(1  J),  ape- 
headed  ;  on  the  right  stand  the  other  two,  namely  Tuamutef 

:J^\\    ^    3,  jackal-headed,    and    Qebhsenuf  [v  |  o  (2 
hawk-headed  (to  illustrate  11.  82  and  S;^). 

PLATE  IX 

14.  Here  follow  figures  of  three  gods,  who,  together 
with  the  Four  Sons  of  Horus,  form  the  Seven  Spirits 
referred  to  in  1.  99.     These  are  : — 

1.  Maa-atef  ^^  ^    ^    s^'  rnan-headed  and  seated  on 

a  mat. 

2.  Kheri-beq-f      l^   J!LJ^0'^'=— '    man-headed   and 

seated  on  a  mat. 

3.  Heru-khenti-ariti  "^[flll  :Sl,    hawk-headed    and 

seated  on  a  mat. 

15.  The  god  Anpu  (Anubis)  (]  \>  ^'  jackal-headed 
and  seated  on  a  mat. 

16.  A  group  of  Seven  Gods,  who,  according  to  some 
authorities,  formed  the  Seven  Spirits,  and,  according  to 
others,  the  Seven  Gods  who  watched  over  the  Tomb  of 
Osiris.     Their  names  are  : — 

I.  (2       ^°1  X^  Netcheh-netciieii,  man-headed. 

^'  h'%^1^^1    n   wj  A^QETQET' snake-headed. 

3.  (111^  rO  I  J\  j<^^_  m        Khenti-heh-f,  man-headed. 

4-  n  "^^  Ammi-unnut-f,  snake-headed. 

5.  "%?*  "^^^  -jj  Tesher-ariti  (?),  man-headed. 


Osiris  and  Ra  meet  in  Tetu  263 

6.  J  n  (1  ^^^  ^  ^=§=t  Bes-maa-em-kerh,  man-headed. 

7.  A  / ^    ^  An-em-hru,  man-headed. 

These  figures  illustrate  11.  99-106  of  the  text. 

17.  A    sepulchral    building,    with   a   palm-leaf  cornice, 

having  at  each  end  of  it  a  /^/  h,  i.e.,  a  figure  which  was 

in  later  times  identified  with  the  sacrum  bone  of  Osiris, 
mounted  on  a  stand.  On  the  top  of  the  building  stand  the 
hawk  of  Ra,  with  the  solar  disk  on  his 
head,  and  a  human-headed  hawk  wear- 
ing the  White  Crown,  and  representing 
the  Heart-soul  of  Osiris.  The  souls 
of  Ra  thus  meet  in  Tetu,  and  are  united 
to  form  one  god.  The  tet  was  in  very- 
primitive  times  the  symbol  of  a  god  to 
which  human  sacrifices  were  offered, 
and  the  ground  in  front  of  it  was 
"  watered  "  with  the  blood  of  human  beings.  The  victims 
were  sometimes  foreigners,  and  sometimes  warriors  who 
had  been  taken  prisoner  alive.  The  centre  of  the  cult  of 
the  tet  was  the  town  in  Lower  Egypt,  which  was  in 
Pharaonic  times  known  as  Tetu,  or  Busiris.  By  some 
means  or  other  the  cult  of  Osiris  was  established  at  Tetu, 
and  little  by  little  it  supplanted  that  of  ihe  tet,  and  Osiris 
absorbed  many  of  the  attributes  of  the  god  Tet.  In  the 
Vignette  we  see  the  hawk  of  Ra  face  to  face  with  the  Heart- 
soul  of  Osiris,  and  the  text  says  that  when  the  Heart-soul  of 
Osiris  goes  to  Tetu  he  finds  the  Heart-soul  of  Ra  there, 
indicating  that  the  cult  of  Ra  was  established  in  Tetu  as 
was  also  the  cult  of  Osiris.  This  Vignette  then  symbolizes 
the  fusion  of  the  cults  of  the  gods  Tet,  Ra,  and  Osiris,  and 
is  of  very  rare  occurrence.      It  illustrates  lines  iii  and  112. 

PLATE  X 

18.  A  large  Cat,  holding  a  knife  "^"^^  in  his  right  fore- 
paw,  cutting  into  a  huge  python,  the  head  of  which  it 
holds  firmly  on  the  ground  with  the  other  forepaw.  The 
python's  tongue  is  projecting  from  its  mouth.  The  Cat  is 
Ra,  and  the  python  is  the  symbol  of  Set,  the  arch-enemy  of 


264 


The  Papyrus  of  Ani 


Ra.      Behind   the   Cat  is  the   famous  Acacia  Tree,  which 

flourished  in  very  early  times  in  Anu,  i.e.,  On,  or  HeHopoHs. 

The  slaying  of  the  python  by 
the  Cat  is  symbolic  of  the 
famous  slaughter  of  the  foes 
of  Ra,  or  Osiris,  which  took 
place  at  Heliopolis,  either  in 
the  Predynastic  Period  or  in 
early  dynastic  times.  The 
appearance     of     the     Acacia 

— — Tree    here    suggests    that    a 

tree-cult  once  existed  at  Heliopolis. 

19.  Three  seated  gods,  two  man-headed  and  the  third 
hawk-headed  ;  each  holds  a  large  knife.  They  probably 
represent  the  gods  Sau,  Horus  of  Sekhem,  and  Nefer-Tem. 

20.  The  god  Khepera,  in  the  form  of  a  beetle-headed 
man,   seated   in   his   boat.      Behind   him   is   the  symbol  of 

"servant"  n,  or  "bodyguard."     The  tops  of  the  steering 

poles  and  posts  are  in  the  form  of  the  head  of  the  hawk  of 
Horus.  In  the  bows  of  the  boat  are  a  libation  jar  on  a 
stand  and  a  lotus.  Over  the  prow  of  the  boat  hangs  a  reed 
mat,  or  a  mass  of  reeds,  on  which  the  look-out  god  usually 
takes  his  place.  In  this  case  the  stand  is  occupied  by 
a  swallow.  In  front  of  the  boat  kneel  Ani  and  his  wife, 
with  their  hands  raised  in  adoration  of  the  god.  The  solar 
character  of  the  boat  is  indicated  by  the  utckat  "^^j  which 
is  painted  on  its  side. 

21.  Two  seated  dog-headed  apes,  with  their  forepaws 
raised  in  adoration  of  the  Eye  of  Ra  "^^  ;  before  each  is  a 
five-rayed  star.     These  apes  represent  I  sis  and  Nephthys. 

22.  Tem  ^^  ^ ,  the  god  of  the  setting  sun,  seated 
within  his  disk  in  the  Sektet  Boat  ;  the  god  wears  the 
Crown  of  the  South  and  North  X7  ,  and  his  face  is  towards 

the   right  hand.     In  the  bows  of  the  boat   is  the  sign  n. 

In  front  of  the  boat  are  a  lotus  and  a  libation  vase  on  a 
stand. 

23.  The  god  Rehu  in  the  form  of  a  lion  lying  on  a  long 
low  building.     Over  his  back  are  bent  some  large  plants, 

^  This  form  of  the  Vignette  is  taken  from  a  papyrus  in  Dublin. 


Water,  the  Primeval  God  265 

round  the  stalk  of  one  of  which  is  coiled  a  uraeus.  Behind 
these  is  Ijl ,  the  symbol  of  Uatchet,  the  Lady  of  Flame. 

Text:  [Chapter   XVI I. ]     Here  begin   the   praises 

AND  GLORIFYINGS  OF  COMING  FORTH  FROM  AND  OF  GOING 
INTO      THE      GLORIOUS      KhERT-NeTER,      WHICH      IS      IN     THE 

Beautiful  Amentet,  and  of  coming  forth  by  day  in 
all  the  forms  of  existence  which  it  may  please  the 

deceased  to  take,  OF  PLAYING  AT  DRAUGHTS  AS  HE 
SITTETH  IN  THE  SeH  ChAMBER,  AND  OF  APPEARING  AS  A 
LIVING    SOUL. 

This  Chapter  is  most  difficult  to  understand,  but  its 
importance  from  a  mythological  point  of  view  cannot  be 
over-estimated.  Why  it  is  included  in  the  Book  of  the 
Dead  at  all  is  impossible  to  say,  but  as  it  is  found  in  all  the 
great  papyri  it  must  have  been  regarded  as  a  most  precious 
document  by  the  theologians  of  Egypt.  Its  subject  matter 
is  the  creation  of  the  world  and  the  origin  of  the  gods,  and 
the  views  set  forth  in  it  represent  the  special  doctrines 
taught  by  the  priesthood  of  Heliopolis.  The  oldest  copies 
of  it  date  from  the  Xlth  dynasty,  and  a  complete  copy  is 
found  in  the  Turin  Papyrus,  which  may  be  assigned  to  the 
XXV I th  dynasty,  or  a  little  later  ;  therefore  it  is  clear  that 
the  Chapter  was  in  use  for  about  two  thousand  years.  It 
is  the  only  ancient  Egyptian  exegetical  work  known. 
Speaking  generally,  the  Chapter  consists  of  a  series  of 
statements,  each  of  which  is  followed  by  a  demand  for  an 
explanation  of  what  has  been  stated.  Thus  in  the  Papyrus 
of  Nebseni  we  have  :  "  I  am  Tem  when  he  existed  alone 
*'  in  Nu  ;  Ra  in  his  risings,  in  his  beginning,  ruling  what  he 
"  had  made."  These  words  are  followed  by  the  demand, 
"  Explain  it,"  i.e.,  What  does  this  mean?  or  To  whom  does 
this  refer  ?  Then  comes  the  explanation  :  "  This  is  Ra  in 
"  his  beginning,  [when  he  was]  ruling  what  he  had  made. 
"  In  the  beginning  was  Ra,  rising  on  the  throne  of 
"  sovereignty  [over]  what  he  had  made.  When  the  pillars 
"  of  Shu  [i.e.,  of  heaven)  did  not  exist,  he  was  on  the  high 
"  ground  (or  hill.)  in  Khemenu  (Hermopolis).  Behold, 
"  there  were  given  to  him  the  inert  ones  in  Khemenu." 
Or  again, 

"  I  am  the  Great  God  who  created  himself." 

Explain  this. 

VOL.  I.  T 


266  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

"  The  Great  God  who  created  himself  is  Nu,  the  father 
"  of  the  gods. 

"  There  is,  however,  another  reading  which  says  that 
"  the  Great  God  who  created  himself  is  Ra,  who  created 
"  the  Nine  Gods  (or,  the  Company  of  the  Gods)  out  of  his 
"  own  names." 

Explain  this. 

"  It  is  Ra  who  made  his  own  names  into  his  members, 
and  these  became  the  gods  who  are  in  his  following." 

The  author  of  the  Chapter  begins  by  mentioning  Tern, 
a  very  ancient  god  of  Heliopolis,  and  then  refers  to  the 
time  when  Tem  existed  by  himself  in  Nu  ^aaaaa  jj .     But 


Nu  was  also  a  god,  and  we  know  from  the  hieroglyphs 
which  form  his  name  that  he  was  the  personification  of  the 
primeval  Celestial  Waters  ;  therefore  there  was  something  in 
existence  before  Tem,  and  that  something  was  the  primeval 
waters.  According  to  the  Egyptian  theologian,  everything 
that  exists  had  its  origin  in  these  waters.  Now  the  author 
of  the  Chapter  wished  to  prove  that  the  Sun-god  Ra,  the 
greatest  of  the  Heliopolitan  gods  from  the  IVth  dynasty 
onwards,  was  directly  descended  from  Nu,  the  Celestial 
Waters,  and  he  therefore  identified  him  at  once  with  Tem. 
Since,  however,  some  might  think  that  the  sky  was  older 
than  the  Sun-god  Ra,  he  goes  on  to  affirm  that  Ra  was  on 
the  high  ground  in  Khemenu  (i.e.,  Hermopolis,  the  city  of 
Thoth)  before  the  supports  of  the  sky  (Shu)  were  created  ; 
meaning  that  Ra  existed  before  there  was  any  sky  at  all. 
And  when  he  says  that  Ra  was  ruling  what  he  had  made 
he  intends  us  to  understand  that  Ra  made  everything  that 
exists.  It  was  a  common  belief  at  Heliopolis  when  the 
Pyramid  Texts  were  written  (Vth  and  Vlth  dynasties)  that 
the  immediate  descendants  of  Tem  were  Shu,  Tefnut,  Keb, 
Nut,  Osiris,  Isis,  Set,  Nephthys,  and  Horus  (or  Anubis) ; 
Ra,  in  fact,  was  not  mentioned  in  the  group.  The  only 
way  out  of  the  difficulty  was  to  identify  Ra  with  Tem,  and 
this  was  the  course  adopted  by  the  author  of  the  Chapter, 
With  reference  to  the  "  inert  ones,  or  children  of  revolt  " 

di  f  ^  J^  i  J  S  ^  m  ■  *,'-■  n^e^ti""--^.  "  Who  were  they?" 
and  "What  were  they?"  arise  naturally.  When  the 
Celestial  Water-god  wished  to  create  Tem,  he  found  that 
all    the    forces    of    inertness    were    arrayed    against    him  ; 


The  Self-produced  God  267 

stillness  disliked  movement,  darkness  abhorred  light,  cold 
was  an  enemy  to  heat,  and  lifelessness  to  life.  The  creation 
of  Tem  destroyed  all  these  forces,  and  they  were  utterly 
vanquished  when  the  sun  rose  for  the  first  time.  When 
Ra  was  identified  with  Tem  he  became  their  master.  They 
were  delivered  over  to  Ra  in  Khemenu,  the  city  of  Thoth, 
who  composed  the  spells  which  Ra  used  in  effectinor  their 
subjection.  This  allusion  to  Thoth  suggests  that  the 
XVIIth  Chapter  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead  must  be  regarded 
as  one  of  the  books  which  Clement  of  Alexandria  calls 
"  Hermetic,"  i.e.,  composed  by  Thoth. 

The  next  subject  discussed  is  the  statement  "  I  am  the 
Great  God  who  created  himself"  The  obvious  answer  to 
the  question  "Who  is  this?"  is  "  Nu,  the  father  of  the 
gods."  But  then  the  author  adds  another  reading,  which 
says  that  the  self-created  god  is  Ra,  and  that  he  created  the 
Nine  Gods  out  of  his  own  names,  i.e.,  that  each  of  the  great 
names  of  Ra  became  a  god.  This  explanation  is,  however, 
difficult  to  understand,  and  further  information  is  demanded. 
The  answer  then  eiven  is  that  the  names  of  Ra  became  the 
members  of  his  body,  and  that  these  became  the  gods  who 
follow  in  his  train. 

In  other  sections  of  the  XVIIth  Chapter  explanations  ot 
words  are  given  which  show  that  they  had  special  myth- 
ological significations.  Thus  in  the  phrase  "I  am  Yesterday  ; 
I  know  To-day,"  Yesterday  is  explained  to  mean  Osiris,  and 
To-day  Ra  ;  and  Eternity  is  the  day,  and  Everlastingness 
the  night.  Allusions  to  ancient  legends  of  the  gods  are  also 
common  ;  in  line  25  it  is  said  that  Ra  had  union  with  his 
own  body  by  means  of  his  phallus  ;  in  11.  61-64  the  gods 
Hu  and  Saa  are  said  to  have  come  into  being  from  the 
drops  of  blood  which  fell  from  Ra  when  he  cut  off  his 
phallus  ;  in  1.  67  we  read  of  the  fight  between  Set  and 
Horus,  when  the  former  threw  filth  in  the  face  of  Horus, 
and  the  latter  destroyed  the  genital  organs  of  Set  ;  in  1.  72 
mention  is  made  of  the  bringing  back  of  the  Eye  of  Ra  by 
Thoth  ;  in  1,  19  (Nebseni)  the  great  fight  in  Anu,  when  the 
foes  of  the  great  god  Neb-er-tcher  were  destroyed,  is  referred 
to;  in  1.  22  the  great  battle  which  took  place  between  the 
gods  and  the  Mesu  Betesh,  or  rebels,  is  mentioned  ;  and  a 
little  further  on  we  read  of  the  burning  of  the  damned, 
the  destruction  of  the  wicked,  and  the  slaughter  of  souls. 

T    2 


268  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

The  section  of  the  XVI I  th  Chapter  that  is  omitted  in 
the  Papyrus  of  Ani  is  naturally  without  illustrative  Vignettes, 
and  we  cannot  therefore  know  the  forms  of  Anaf  and  of 
Shesmu,  the  headsman  of  Osiris,  and  the  similitude  of  the 
dread  god  Matchet  also  is  not  depicted.  All  must  regret, 
too,  the  want  of  Vignettes  referring  to  the  god  who  watched 
by  the  Bend  in  the  Lake  of  Fire,  and  the  heart  of  Osiris, 
and  the  Mesqet  chamber,  wherein  the  deceased  was  re-born. 
The  frequent  prayers  found  throughout  the  Chapter  prove 
that  Ani  was  a  firm  believer  in  the  doctrines  enunciated  in  it, 
and  that  the  chamber  of  torture  in  the  Other  World, 
wherein  were  merciless  gods  with  "cruel  fingers,"  which 
sliced  up  the  bodies  of  the  dead  and  shredded  their  flesh, 
and  a  bloodthirsty  executioner  who  slaughtered  always,  were 
to  him  very  real  things  indeed.  Notwithstanding  the  many 
difficulties  that  beset  the  modern  student  of  this  Chapter, 
due  partly  to  the  perplexing  character  of  the  subject  matter 
and  partly  to  the  mistakes  and  omissions  in  the  text,  its 
general  meaning  is  clear,  and  it  is  easy  to  see  that  a 
knowledge  of  its  contents  was  held  to  be  absolutely 
indispensable  to  that  soul  who  hoped  to  reach  the  Kingdom 
of  Osiris  and  to  live  with  the  god  who  alone  could  sustain  it, 
who  was  the  only  destroyer  of  wrong  and  the  Guide  to  the 
paths  of  Eternity.  It  was  not  Nu,  the  father  of  the  gods,  or 
Tem,  or  Ra,  who  had  the  power  to  bestow  everlasting  life, 
but  Osiris,  and  Osiris  only. 

PLATES  XI  AND  XII 

The  Egyptians  believed  that  the  country  forming  the 
Kingdom  of  Osiris  was  divided  into  districts,  or  parts,  the 
boundary  of  each  of  which  was  marked  by  a  fortress  or 
stronghold,  which  was  held  by  a  group  of  servants  of  the  god. 
They  also  thought  that  these  forts  were  used  by  the  souls 
of  the  dead  on  their  journey  to  the  "  City  of  God,"  much  as 
modern  travellers  in  the  Sudan,  or  Persia,  or  Mesopotamia, 
use  the  "  khans  "  or  inns,  or  halting-places,  which  supply 
the  weary  wayfarer  with  shelter  and  food,  and  enable  him  to 
enjoy  some  days  of  rest  in  security.  At  one  time  these 
forts,  or  strongholds,  or  "gates,"  were  thought  to  be  seven 
in  number,  and  at  other  times  the  Egyptians  believed  their 
number  was  ten,  or  fourteen,  or  sixteen,  or  even  twenty-one. 
The  seven  forts  that  formed  a  chain  across  Dead-land  were 


The  Mansions  of  Osiris  269 

called  "  Arits,"  a  word  which  is  often  translated  "  Mansions," 
or  "  Halls."  Each  Arit  was  provided  with  a  doorkeeper,  a 
watcher,  or  official  who  kept  a  good  look  out  to  announce 
the  arrival  of  a  traveller,  and  a  herald,  who  interviewed  the 
visitor  and  enquired  his  name,  and  reported  it  to  his 
companions.  This  arrangement  is  identical  with  that  which 
has  been  common  in  all  parts  of  Africa  from  time  immemorial 
in  respect  of  the  forts  that  are  built  at  the  entrances  to 
towns  and  villages.  In  the  case  of  the  Seven  Arits  no  soul 
could  hope  to  gain  admission  to  anyone  of  them  unless  it 
was  able  to  state  the  names  of  the  doorkeeper  and  watcher 
and  herald,  and  to  repeat  a  formula  which  would  convince 
them  of  its  good  faith.  The  writer  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead 
composed  a  Chapter  in  which  the  names  of  all  the  officials 
of  the  Arits  were  given,  as  well  as  the  seven  formulae_  that 
secured  for  those  who  knew  them  admission  into  the  Arits. 
In  Plates  XI  and_  XII  we  see  Ani  and  his  wife  Tutu 
approaching  the  Arits,  and  pictures  of  the  gods  who 
ofuarded  them. 

Vignette  I.     The  First  Arit.     The  cornice  of  the 

door  of  the  First  Arit  is  ornamented  with  symbols  of  life  -f-, 

Stability  u,  and  power  1.     At  the  entrance  sit  three  gods, 

the  first  having  the  head  of  a  hare,  the  second  the  head  of 
a  serpent,  and  the  third  the  head  of  a  crocodile.  The  first 
holds  a  whisk,  made  probably  of  the  tail  of  some  animal, 
and  each  of  the  others  a  knife. 

Text:  [Chapter  CXLVII.] 

The  name  of  the  Doorkeeper  is  Sekhetherash- 
taru. 

The  name  of  the  Watcher  is  Metiheh. 

The  name  of  the  Herald  is  Hakheru. 
These  are  followed  by  the  formula  that  Ani  recites. 

Vignette  2.  The  Second  Arit.  This  Arit  is  guarded 
by  three  gods  :  the  first  has  the  head  of  a  lion,  the  second 
the  head  of  a  man,  and  the  third  the  head  of  a  dog.  Each 
holds  a  knife. 

Text :  The  name  of  the  Doorkeeper  is  Unhat. 

The  name  of  the  Watcher  is  Seqether. 

The  name  of  the  Herald  is  Uset. 
These  are  followed  by  the  formula  that  Ani  recites. 


270  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

Vignette  3.  The  Third  Arit.  This  Arit  is  guarded 
by  three  gods  :  the  first  has  the  head  of  a  jackal,  the  second 
the  head  of  a  dog,  and  the  third  the  head  of  a  serpent. 
The  first  holds  a  whisk,  and  each  of  the  others  a  knife. 

Text  :    The   name   of   the    Doorkeeper   is    Unemhau- 
auentpehui. 

The  name  of  the  Watcher  isSeresher. 

The  name  of  the  Herald  is  Aa. 
These  are  followed  by  the  formula  that  Ani  recites. 

Vignette  4.  The  Fourth  Arit.  This  Arit  is  guarded 
by  three  gods  :  the  first  has  the  head  of  a  man,  the  second 
the  head  of  a  hawk,  and  the  third  the  head  of  a  lion.  The 
first  holds  a  whisk,  and  each  of  the  others  a  knife. 

Text :  The  name  of  the  Doorkeeper  is  Khesefherasht- 
kheru. 

The  name  of  the  Watcher  is  Serestepu. 

The  name  of  the  Herald  is  Khesefat. 
These  are  followed  by  the  formula  that  Ani  recites. 

Vignette  5-  The  Fifth  Arit.  This  Arit  is  guarded 
by  three  gods  :  the  first  has  the  head  of  a  hawk,  the  second 
the  head  of  a  man,  and  the  third  the  head  of  a  serpent. 
The  first  holds  a  whisk,  and  each  of  the  others  a  knife. 

Text  :  The  name  of  the  Doorkeeper  is  Ankhfemfent. 
The  name  of  the  Watcher  is  Shabu. 
The  name  of  the  Herald  is  Tebherkehakheft. 

These  are  followed  by  the  formula  that  Ani  recites.  In 
it  the  deceased  says  :  "  I  have  brought  unto  thee  thy  jaw- 
"  bones  in  Rasta,  I  have  brought  unto  thee  thy  backbone 
"  in  Anu,  gathering  together  all  thy  members  there."  The 
word  "jawbones,"  arti,  has  been  understood  by  some  to 
mean  the  upper  and  the  lower  jaw,  but  this  is  not  the  case, 
for  it  indicates  the  right  and  left  sides  of  the  lower  jaw  only. 
The  Arab  physicians  in  Egypt  thought  that  the  lower  jaw 
consisted  of  two  parts,  which  were  joined  at  the  chin,  and 
the  ancient  Egyptians  probably  thought  the  same.  The 
mention  here  of  the  bringing  of  the  "jawbones"  is  most 
interesting,  for  it  shows  that  at  one  time  in  Egypt  the  lower 
jaw  and  the  backbone  were  carefully  preserved  so  that  they 
might  be  re-used  in  the  reconstitution  of  the  body.  On 
the  preservation  of  the  jawbone  in  Uganda  and  the  bearing 


The  Mansions  of  Osiris  271 

of  the  custom  on  primitive  Egyptian  religious  beliefs  see  my 
Osiris  and  the  Egyptian  Resurrection,  Vol.  II,  pp.  91  ff. 
The  association  in  the  text  of  the  "jawbones"  with  Osiris 
is  a  valuable  proof  of  the  identity  of  beliefs  in  the  Sudan 
and  Egypt. 

Vignette  6.  The  Sixth  Arit.  This  Arit  is  guarded 
by  three  gods  :  the  first  has  the  head  of  a  jackal,  and  the 
second  the  head  of  a  crocodile,  and  the  third  the  head  of  a 
dog.    The  first  holds  a  whisk,  and  each  of  the  others  a  knife. 

Text :  The  name  of  the  Doorkeeper  is  Atektaukehaq- 
kheru. 

The  name  of  the  Watcher  is  Anher. 

The  name  of  the  Herald  is  Atesher. 
These  are  followed  by  the  formula  that  Ani  recites. 

Vignette  7.  The  Seventh  Arit.  This  Arit  is 
guarded  by  three  gods  :  the  first  has  the  head  of  a  hare, 
the  second  the  head  of  a  lion,  and  the  third  the  head  of  a 
man.  The  first  and  second  each  hold  a  knife,  and  the  third 
a  whisk. 

Text :  The   name    of  the    doorkeeper    is    Sekhemme- 
tenusen. 

The  name  of  the  Watcher  is  Aamaakheru. 

The  name  of  the  Herald  is  Khesefkhemi. 
These  are  followed  by  the  formula  that  Ani  recites. 

The  CXLVIth  Chapter  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead  also 
deals  with  the  Seven  Arits  ;  that  is,  the  Vignette  consists  of 
the  pictures  of  seven  doors,  and  the  text  that  accompanies 
each  picture  contains  merely  three  names.  Of  these  names 
one  appears  to  be  that  of  the  door,  and  the  other  two  are 
the  names  of  the  officers  of  the  door  who  are  depicted  below 
the  text.  The  guardian  gods  are  sometimes  all  human- 
headed,  and  at  others  all  animal-headed  ;  in  one  papyrus 
(Naville,  Todtenbuch,  Bl.  CLI V,  Ik)  Set  appears  as  one  of  the 
guardians.  In  the  Papyrus  of  Bakou  (Brocklehurst  Papyrus) 
the  CXLIVth  Chapter  is  entitled  the  "Chapter  of  entering 

in "      1     ~^t      ,   and    it  is  prefaced    by  a  short  prayer  in 

which  the  doorkeepers  are  entreated  to  "  make  a  way  to  him 
so  that  he  may  pass  through  you,  for  he  is  Nu,"  and  "  to 
open  the  hidden  habitations."     In  the  CXLVIIth  Chapter 


272  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

the  text  of  a  prayer  is  added  to  the  Vignette  of  each  Arit, 
which  in  some  papyri  consists  of  a  door  by  which  only  one 
god  is  seated. 

It  has  already  been  said  that  the  fortresses  in  Dead-land 
were  sometimes  believed  to  be  ten,  or  fourteen,  or  sixteen, 
or  even  twenty-one,  in  number ;  the  Papyrus  of  Ani  makes 
them  to  be  ten,  and  calls  them  "  Sebkhet,"  or  "  Pylons." 
In  Plates  XI  and  XII  we  see  Ani  and  his  wife  Tutu 
advancing  to  the  Ten  Pylons,  with  their  hands  raised  in 
adoration.  Each  Pylon  is  guarded  by  a  ministering  god  or 
goddess,  seated  on  a  mat.  As  the  deceased  arrived  at  each 
Pylon  he  made  to  it  a  short  address,  which  to  all  intents 
and  purposes  formed  the  name  of  the  Pylon  and  of  the 
deity  inside  it.  Thus,  when  he  came  to  the  First  Pylon  he 
said  :  "  I  have  made  the  way.  I  know  you.  I  know  thy 
"  name.     I  know  the  name  of  thy  warder.    Nebt-setau-qat- 

"  SEBT  -  HERT  -NEBT-KHEBKHEB -  SERT  -  METU-KHESFET-NESHNI- 

"  NEHMET-UAi-EN-i  is  thy  name."  This  name  translated 
means  :  "  Lady  of  tremblings,  [surrounded  by]  lofty  walls, 
"  the  chieftainess,  lady  of  destruction,  the  disposer  of  the 
"  words  that  drive  away  storms  and  deliver  from  destruction 
"  him  that  travelleth  along  the  way." 

Vignette  I.  The  First  Pylon.  In  this  Pylon  is 
seated  a  vulture-headed  groddess  wearing-  a  disk  on  her 
head,  and  holding  a  whisk.     Above  the  Pylon  is  a  row  of 

A  AAA    which  presumably  represent  spears  or  a  protecting 

wall. 

Text :  [Chapter  CXLVI.]  An  address  to  the  goddess, 
and  the  name  of  the  warder  of  the  Pylon — Neruit. 

Vignette  2.  The  Second  Pylon.  In  this  Pylon  is 
seated  a  lion-headed  goddess,  holding  a  whisk,  and  on  its 
roof  lies  a  monster  speckled  serpent. 

Text :  An  address  to  the  goddess,  and  the  name  of  the 
warder  of  the  Pylon — Mes-Ptah. 

Vignette  3.     The   Third    Pylon.     In  this  Pylon  is 

seated  a  man -headed  deity,  holding  a  whisk,  and  above  it 

are  the  two  Eyes  of  heaven,  the  Sun  and  the  Moon,  with 

the  emblems  of  eternity,  water,  and  a  vase  between  them 

Q 


The  Gates  of  the  Other  World  273 

Text :  An  address  to  the  deity  of  the  Pylon,  and  the 
name  of  its  warder — Sebaq. 

Vignette  4.  Thp:  Fourth  Pylon.  In  this  Pylon  is 
seated  a  hornless,  cow-headed  goddess,  holding  a  whisk, 
and  above  it  is  a  cornice  formed  of  uraei  with  solar  disks 

on  their  heads  ^PjP»- 

Text :  An  address  to  the  goddess,  and  the  name  of  the 
warder  of  the  Pylon — Nekau. 

Vignette  5.  The  Fhth  Pylon.  In  this  Pylon  is 
seated  a  hippopotamus-goddess.  Her  forefeet  rest  upon  the 
symbol  of  an  organ  of  her  body,  and  between  them  she 
holds  a  large  knife.  Above  the  roof  of  the  Pylon  are  the 
symbols  of  "  heat  "  and  the  "  strength  of  youth,"  or  perhaps 

"fecundity"  f||f|f(]|(|. 

Text  :  An  address  to  the  goddess,  and  the  name  of 
the  warder  of  the  Pylon — Hentet-Arqiu. 

Vignette  6.  Tpie  Sixth  Pylon.  In  this  Pylon  is 
seated  a  squat  dwarf,  who  holds  in  his  right  hand  a 
whisk  and  in  his  left  a  large  knife.  On  the  roof  lies  a 
monster  speckled  serpent.  The  size  of  this  serpent  cannot 
be  comprehended,  and  it  is  said  to  have  been  born  in  the 
presence  of  the  Still-Heart,  i.e.,  Osiris. 

Text :  An  address  to  the  god,  and  the  name  of  the 
warder  of  the  Pylon — SemAtl 

Vignette  7.  The  Seventh  Pylon.  In  this  Pylon 
is  seated  a  ram-headed  god,  holding  a  whisk.     On  the  roof 

is  a  row  of  S  fl  fl  fi  • 

Text :  An  address  to  the  god,  and  the  name  of  the 
warder  of  the  Pylon — Saktif. 

Vignette  8.  The  Eighth  Pylon.  In  this  Pylon  is 
the  hawk  of  Horus  standing  on  a  sepulchral  building  called 

serekh  (1  ^M^\  he  wears  the  double  crown  of  the 
South  and  the  North  ^,  and  has  a  whisk  before  him  and 
an  titchat  '^^,  behind  him.  On  the  roof  of  the  shrine  are 
two  human-headed  hawks,  emblems  of  the  Souls  of  Ra 
and  Osiris,  and  two  emblems  of  "  life  "  X\  -j"  ^g\  nr  • 


274  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

Text :  An  address  to  the  god,  and  the  name  of  the 
warder  of  the  Pylon — Khutchetef. 

Vignette  9.  The  Ninth  Pylon.  In  this  Pylon  is 
seated  a  lion-headed  deity  with  a  disk  on  his  head,  and 
holdine  a  whisk.     Above  the  shrine  is  a  series  of  uraei. 

o 

Text :  An  address  to  the  deity,  and  the  name  of  the 
warder  of  the  shrine — Arisutchesef. 

Vignette  10.  The  Tenth  Pylon.  In  this  shrine  is 
seated  a  ram-headed  deity  wearing  the  Atef  Crown  J^ , 
and  holding  a  whisk.  On  the  roof  of  the  Pylon  are  two 
serpents. 

Text :  An  address  to  the  deity,  and  the  name  of  the 
warder  of  the  Pylon — Sekhenur.  The  texts  of  the  i  ith- 
2ist  Pylons  are  wanting  in  the  Papyrus  of  Ani.  In  the 
Papyrus  of  Thena  (Naville,  op.  cit.,  Bl.  CLXIIIf),  fourteen 
Vignettes  are  given,  and  each  is  quite  different  from  any  of 
the  Vignettes  in  the  Papyrus  of  Ani.  The  doors  are 
decorated  with  a  variety  of  strange  designs,  e.g.,  the 
eleventh  door  has   on  it  the   solar  disk  floating  on  water 

•^iO"^,  the   third   is   decorated   with  ^^vi  and  t  t  t,  the 


A/\/VAAA 


sixth   with    four  uraei    on  a  standard  \lsmmk    ,  etc.  ;  and 

^ 

many  of  the  doors  are  surmounted  by  bulls'  heads,  lions' 

heads,  etc.      In  the  Turin  Papyrus  the  first  ten  Pylons  are 

surmounted    by  serpents,   the    eleventh    by   two    cats,   the 

twelfth  by  a  serpent,  the  thirteenth  by  figures  of  the  two 

Nile-gods,  the  fourteenth  by  a  bull's  head  and  a  serpent,  and 

the  fifteenth  by  a  row  of  $  fi  6  5  6  6  • 


PLATES  XII  (continued)  and  XIII 

Introduction  to  Chapter  XVIII 

Vignette  I.  The  Osiris  Ani  standing  with  his  hands 
raised  in  adoration  of  the  series  of  gods  who  preside  over 
the  great  cities  of  Egypt ;  behind  him  stands  his  wife  Tutu, 
holding  a  sistrum  in  her  right  hand  and  the  green  head  of 
some  plant  in  her  left. 


The  Gates  of  the  Other  World  275 

Text  :  A  prayer  of  Ani  to  Khent  Amentet  Un-Nefer  in 
Abydos.  He  declares  that  his  heart  holds  truth,  that  there 
is  no  sin  in  his  body,  that  he  has  not  told  lies  or  acted 
deceitfully. 

Vignette  2.  A  door  surmounted  by  ostrich  feathers 
and  uraei  wearing  disks  [)  U  U  O  U  •  Before  it  stands  the 
Anmutef  [ll^N.    ^   3  priest,  wearing  the  lock  of  hair '^, 

symbolic  of  youth,  on  the  right  side  of  his  head.  His 
dress  consists  of  a  short  white  linen  loin  cloth  and  a  leopard 
skin,  his  arms  coming  through  holes  in  the  skin  where  the 
fore-legs  of  the  leopard  had  been.  His  left  hand  clasps  the 
skin  of  the  right  hind  leg  of  the  animal. 

Text :  An  address  to  the  Tchatchau  Chiefs  of  heaven, 
earth,  and  Khert-Neter.  The  Anmutef  priest  presents  Ani 
who,  he  says,  is  not  obnoxious  to  any  of  the  gods,  and 
claims  admission  for  him  among  the  Chiefs. 

Vignette  3.     Ani  and  Tutu  as  in  Vignette  i. 

Text :  Ani's  prayer  to  the  King  of  Khert-Neter  and 
Governor  of  Akert. 

Vignette  4.      A  door  surmounted  by  a  figure  of  Anubis 

^^  and  an  titchat.     Before  it  stands  the  Sa-mer-f^^  <=z>, 

dressed  like  the  Anmutef  priest. 

Text :  An  address  by  the  Sa-mer-f  priest  to  the 
Tchatchau  of  Ra-stau.  He  presents  Ani  and  demands  an 
estate  for  him  in  Sekhet  Hetepet,  with  cakes  and  air,  and 
asks  that  his  rations  may  be  like  those  of  the  Followers  of 
Horus.  This  Introduction  is  found  in  no  papyrus  save 
that  of  Ani.  Usually  Chapter  XVHI  is  regarded  as  a 
continuation  of  Chapter  XV  H,  and  it  is  very  rarely  accom- 
panied by  Vignettes,  other  than  those  containing  figures  of 
the  gods  only.  In  the  Papyrus  Busca  (Naville,  op.  cit., 
Bd.  I,  Bl.  XXXI)  we  see  the  deceased  ploughing  and 
sowing,  and  he  and  his  wife  are  dragging  along  the  shrine 
of  Seker  mounted  on  a  sledge. 

Vignette  I.  The  five  Chiefs  of  Anu  (Heliopolis)  : 
(i)  Temu,  wearing  the  Crowns  of  the  South  and  North 
and  a  mendt.     (2)  The  Sudani  god  Shu,  with  a  black  face, 


276  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

wearing  a  low  crown  made  of  feathers,  with  a  sort  of 
streamer,  which  falls  down  behind  his  back.  (3)  The 
Lioness-goddess  Tefnut,  also  of  Sildani  origin,  wearing  on 
her  head  the  solar  disk.  (4)  The  god  Osiris,  wearing  the 
A tef  Crown  and  a  mendt.  His  face  is  green,  which  seems 
to  suggest  old  age,  and  he  has  the  usual  pointed  and  curved 
African  beard.     (5)  The  god  Thoth,  ibis-headed. 

Text:  [Chapter  XVIII. ]  Without  tide.  The  open- 
ing section  of  this  Chapter  is  unaccountably  omitted  in  the 
Papyrus  of  Ani,  and  a  version  of  it  is  supplied  in  my 
translation  from  the  Papyrus  of  Nebseni. 

Vignette  2.  The  gods  and  goddesses  of  Tetu  (Busiris) : 
(i)   The   god    Osiris,  as    before.       (2)  The   goddess    Isis, 

with  jj  on  her  head.     (3)  The  goddess  Nephtbys  with  the 

hieroglyph  for  her  name   on   her  head  Tf.     (4)  The  god 

Horus,  son  of  Isis,  hawk-headed. 

Text :  Section  relating  to  setting  up  the  tet  in  Tetu. 

Vignette  3.  The  gods  of  Sekhem  (Letopolis)  : 
(i)  Osiris,  as  before.  (2)  Horus,  wearing  the  Crowns  of 
the  South  and  the  North.  (3  and  4)  The  two  Eyes  of  Ra, 
each  on  a  pylon.     (5)  The  god  Thoth. 

Text :  Section  relating  to  the  "  Things  of  the  Night 
Festival "  in  Sekhem. 

Vignette  4.  The  gods  of  Pe-Tep  (Buto  in  the  Delta) : 
(1^  Horus,  as  in  the  second  Vignette.  (2)  Isis,  as  before. 
(3)  Kesta  (Mesta),  a  son  of  Horus,  man-headed.  (4)  Hapi 
(Hep),  a  son  of  Horus,  ape-headed. 

Text :  Section  relating  to  the  setting  up  of  the  canopied 
throne  for  Horus  after  the  overthrow  of  Set  and  his  fiends 
by  the  followers  of  Horus. 

Vignette  5*  The  gods  who  are  in  Taiu-Rekhti : 
(i)  Osiris,  as  before.  (2)  Isis,  as  before.  (3)  Anubis, 
jackal-headed.  (4)  A  bearded  god.  (5)  The  god  Thoth, 
with  a  crescent  moon,  having  the  full  moon  inside  it,  on  his 
head. 

Text:  Section  referring  to  the  lamentation  of  Isis  for 
Osiris. 


The  Gods  of  the  Osiris-cities  277 

PLATE  XIV 

Vignette  6.  The  gods  who  are  in  Abydos  :  (i)  Osiris, 
as    before.      (2)   Isis,    as    before.      (3)  Anubis,    as    before. 

(4)  The  tet  with  the  Two  Eyes  of  Ra  ^^  ^5- 

Text :  Section  referring  to  the  judgment  of  the  dead 
and  the  infliction  of  punishment  upon  those  who  are  con- 
demned to  destruction  in  the  judgment. 

Vignette  7«  The  gods  who  preside  over  the  judgment 
of  the  dead  :  (i)  Thoth,  as  before.     (2)  Osiris,  as  before. 

(3)  Anubis,  as  before.    (4)  A  bearded  god,  Asten  |]n''^''0' 
the  associate  of  Thoth. 

Text :  Section  relating  to  the  condemnation  of  Set  and 
his  fiends,  and  to  the  carrying  out  of  their  sentence  of  doom. 

Vignette  8.  The  three  gods  who  presided  over  the 
ploughing  up  of  the  earth  in  Tetu,  and  the  mingling  of  the 
blood  of  the  rebels  with  the  earth. 

Text :  Section  referring  to  the  slaughter  of  the  followers 
of  Set,  and  the  pouring  out  of  their  blood  on  the  earth 
before  the  gods,  and  the  digging  of  the  blood  into  the 
ground.  This  section  shows  that  a  great  slaughter  of  the 
enemies  of  Osiris  took  place  at  T^tu,  as  well  as  at  Hensu 
(Herakleopolis),  and  it  is  clear  that  the  sacrifices  made  there 
were  offered  up  to  the  tet,  the  symbol  of  a  god  who  was 
worshipped  at  Busiris  in  predynastic  times. 

Vignette  9.  The  great  gods  of  Anrutef,  a  district  of 
Hensu  in  Upper  Egypt :  (i)  Ra,  hawk-headed,  and  wearing 
the  solar  disk  on  his  head.  (2)  Osiris,  as  before.  (3)  Shu, 
the  Sudani  god  from  Baqem,  with  a  green  face,  and  wearing 
a  crown  of  feathers,  from  which  a  sort  of  streamer  falls 
down  behind.  (4)  Beba,  the  first-born  son  of  Osiris,  dog- 
headed.     The  forms  of  the  name  of  the  god  last  mentioned 

are    Beb  JJ^,    Baba  J^J^I^,    J  %.  J  ^ 

^4.  andAbabi^J^jqy. 

Text :  Section  relating  to  the  deposit  of  the  relics  of 
Osiris,  the  thigh,  the  leg,  and  the  heel  at  Anrutef,  the  place 
where  nothing  grows. 


278  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

Vignette  10.  The  gods  of  Rasta  :  (i)  Horus,  hawk- 
headed,  and  wearing  the  Crowns  of  the  South  and  the 
North.  (2)  The  god  Osiris,  wearing  the  Atef  Crown. 
(3)   Isis,  wearing  the  symbol  of  a  Sudani  goddess  on  her 

head  instead  of  jj.     (4)  A  god  who  is  unnamed.     We  may 

note,  in  passing,  the  omission  of  two  of  the  Sons  of  Horus, 
Tuamutef  and  Qebhsenuf,  from  the  Vignettes. 

Text :  Section  referring  to  the  satisfaction  of  heart  of 
Osiris,  and  to  the  existence  of  peace  in  the  east  and  west. 

The  XVIIIth  Chapter  contains  ten  addresses  by  the 
deceased  to  Thoth,  who  is  prayed  to  make  his  word  truth 
before  his  enemies,  just  as  Thoth  made  the  word  of  Osiris  truth 
before  his  enemies.  In  each  address  reference  is  made  to 
one  of  the  very  critical  events  which  took  place  in  the 
history  of  Osiris.  It  will  be  noted  that  none  of  the  great 
cosmic  gods  took  part  in  these  occurrences. 

The  Rubric  states  that  the  recital  of  the  Chapter  shall 
cause  the  deceased  to  come  forth  by  day,  to  escape  every  fire 
in  the  Other  World,  and  to  take  any  and  every  form  he 
pleases,  and  shall  purify  him  from  all  uncleanness,  and  free 
him  from  all  the  disabilities  that  cling  to  him  upon  earth. 

PLATE  XV 

Vignette  :  A  seated  statue  of  Ani  the  scribe.     Facing 

it  is  a  figure  of  the  Sent  priest  H  ^v  ,  who  is  clad  in  linen 

garments   over   which    he  has   put  a  leopard's   skin.      He 

holds  in  his  hand  the  wooden  instrument  "  tirheka  "  "^^f  ?  [_J, 

I.e.,  "  the  mighty  one  of  spells,"  which  has  one  end  in  the 
form  of  a  ram's  head.  In  front  of  the  statue  is  a  small  box 
containing  unguents   and   colours,  the   instruments    Scbur, 

i<  -^^  ,  and   Twid   ^^,       1     ,  and  the  Pesh-en-kef  ^^-^a 

\f^.     The    priest    touches    the  mouth,   the    nose,   and 

the  eyes  of  the  statue  with  these  instruments,  and  thereby 

performs  the  great  and  solemn  ceremony  of  Un-ra  ■^^l         , 

or  "  Opening  the  mouth."  These  ceremonies  gave  to  the 
deceased  in  the  Other  World  the  power  to  eat,  drink,  think, 


Of  Supplying  Words  of  Power  279 

talk,  and  move  about  at  pleasure.  As  the  priest  performed 
each  ceremony  he  recited  a  formula  that  had  the  effect  of 
restorinij-  to  the  deceased  some  power  or  faculty  of  which 
the  death  of  his  body  had  deprived  him.  The  ceremony  of 
"Opening"  the  mouth"  is  very  ancient,  and  was  certainly 
performed  on  the  statues  of  the  dead  in  the  earliest  dynasties. 
Tradition  asserts  that  Ptah  unbandaged  the  gods,  and  that 
Shu  opened  their  mouths  with  an  iron  knife,  and  that  the 
words  that  were  recited  whilst  these  gods  were  opening  the 
mouths  of  the  gods  were  composed  by  Thoth,  the  great 
magician  of  Ra,  whose  intelligence,  or  mind,  he  was.  The 
series  of  ceremonies  which  were  performed  when  the  mouth 
of  a  king  was  opened,  and  the  formulae  which  were  recited 
are  given  in  a  handy  form  in  my  edition  The  Opening  of 
the  MoiUh,  2  vols.  :    London,  1909. 

Text  :  [Chapter  XXI 1 1.]  The  Chapter  of  Opening 
THE  Mouth  of  the  Osiris  Ani.  The  text  states  that  it  is 
Set  who  keeps  the  mouth  of  Ani  closed  by  bandages,  and 
says  that  Tem  shall  cast  them  away.     Ani  identifies  himself 

with  the  Sun-goddess  Sekhmet,and  with  Sahit  'iqJ  H  (]  (J  "^lA 

^  IX  ,  a  powerful  Star-goddess  and  wife  of  Orion  the  Giant, 

and  he  calls  upon  all  the  gods  to  do  away  with  the  ill -effects 
of  any  spell  which  any  ill-disposed  being  shall  cast  upon  him. 

Vignette  :  [Wanting  in  the  Theban  Recension.] 

Text:  [Chapter  XXIV.]  The  Chapter  of  bringing 
words  of  power,  or  spells,  to  the  Osiris  Ani  in  Khert- 
Neter.  In  this  Chapter  Ani  identifies  himself  with  Tem- 
Khepera,  who  composed  the  words  of  power  that  Thoth 
pronounced,  which  resulted  in  the  creation  of  the  heavens 
and  the  earth.  In  the  character  of  this  eod  Ani  could 
pronounce  words,  the  effect  of  which  would  be  to  give  him 
everything  that  he  desired.  Now,  the  Egyptians  thought 
that  words  were  concrete  things,  and  that  it  was  possible  to 
steal  from  a  man  his  words  of  power,  or  the  spells  where- 
with he  had  been  provided  ;  and  whereas  we  should  say 
that  we  had  forgotten  a  formula,  the  Egyptian  would  say 
that  it  had  been  stolen  from  him.  The  object  of  this 
Chapter  was  to  give  a  man  in  Khert-Neter  the  ability  to 
make  his  words  of  power,  supposing  they  had  gone  away, 


28o  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

or  been  carried  away  from  him,  to  return  to  him,  no  matter 
how  far  away  they  had  been  carried.  When  the  Chapter 
was  recited  by  Ani,  his  spells  would  return  to  him  more 
swiftly  than  greyhounds  can  run,  and  quicker  than  the  light. 
Its  recital,  too,  would  obtain  for  him  the  help  of  "  him  that 

brouoht  the  ferry-boat  of  Ra,"   |\  "^'^^  \v\       ?^  ^  n''^  -^ 

i.e.,   of    the    orod     Herfhaf  ^  '   "tfP^^^  J),     who    ferried 


the  souls  of  the  righteous  over  to  the  Island  of  Fire, 
wherein  Osiris  reigned.  The  word  of  power  which  Ani 
wanted  to  possess  was  that  the  utterance  of  which  would 
enable  him  to  recreate  himself.  Closely  connected  with 
this  Chapter  is  the  XXVth,  a  rendering  of  which  is  given 
in  the  Appendix.  The  recital  of  this  Chapter  enabled  a 
man  to  recall  to  memory  his  name,  if  by  any  chance  he 
forgot  it,  and  also  the  name  of  any  and  every  god  whom  he 
might  happen  to  meet.  As  we  have  already  seen,  the 
deceased  was  called  upon  to  declare  the  names  of  the 
guardians  of  the  Arits  and  Pylons  in  the  land  of  Osiris, 
and,  if  he  were  unable  to  remember  these  names,  he  would 
assuredly  not  be  admitted  into  them.  The  nameless  soul 
in  the  Other  World  could  not  be  presented  to  the  Great 
God,  and,  as  his  name  could  not  appear  in  the  list  of  the 
names  of  those  who  were  to  receive  their  rations  from  the 
table  of  the  god,  he  would  perish.  The  name  of  a  man  was 
an  integral  part  of  his  being,  and  to  steal  it  from  him  was  to 
ensure  his  destruction.  No  greater  harm  could  be  done  to 
the  deceased  than  the  erasing  of  his  name  from  his  statues, 
stelae,  or  tomb,  for  the  destruction  of  his  name  was 
equivalent  to  the  destruction  of  his  individuality. 

Vignette  :  The  scribe  Ani  standing  upright  and  arrayed 
in  white.  His  right  hand  is  laid  on  his  breast,  over  his 
heart,  and  with  his  left  he  touches  a  necklace,  which 
presumably  he  is  receiving  from  the  god  Anubis.  The 
necklace  is  composed  of  several  rows  of  beads  and  to  it  is 
attached  a  pectoral  in  the  form  of  a  pylon,  made  of  faience, 
and  inlaid  with  a  figure  of  the  Boat  of  Ra,  with  the  solar 
disk^  resting  in  it.     Anubis  is  jackal-headed,  and  he  holds 

^  Or  perhaps  a  scarab ;   see  the  specimens  exhibited  in  the  Fourth 
Egyptian  Room  in  the  British  Museum. 


Of  Preserving  the  Heart 


281 


a  sceptre  in  the  right  hand,  and  a  symbol  of  "  Hfe  "  -r-,  in 
the  left. 

Text :  [Chapter  XXVI.]     The  Chapter  of   giving 

A     HEART     TO     THE     OsiRIS     AnI     IN     KhERT-NeTER.         The 

object  of  this  Chapter  was  the  restoration  of  the  heart  of  the 
deceased  to  him.  In  primitive  times  the  internal  organs 
were  removed  from  the  body  after  death  and  destroyed, 
but  when  mummification  of  the  bodies  of  the  wealthy 
became  general,  the  heart,  lungs,  gall-bladder,  etc.,  were 
mummified  separately.  As  it  was  Anubis  who  presided 
over  the  mummification  of  the  dead,  and  who  had  therefore 
authority  over  the  hearts  of  the  dead,  it  was  necessary  to 
invoke  his  goodwill,  and  to  persuade  him  to  return  to  the 
deceased  his  heart  in  Khert-Neter.  In  the  Vio-nettes  to 
this  Chapter  we  see  the  god  returning  to  the  deceased  his 
heart,  or  giving  to  him  a  necklace  with  a  pectoral  containing 
a  stone  scarab  on  which  were  written  the  magfical  words  of 
the  most  important  of  the  Chapters  of  the  Heart  (XXXb). 
The  heart  was  the  home  of  the  Ba-soul,  on  which  the  Ka, 
or  Double,  depended  for  existence.  The  destruction  of  the 
heart  involved  the  annihilation  of  the  Ba-soul  and  the  Ka  ; 
and  it  was  the  Ba-soul  which  partook  of  the  offerings  made 
to  the  dead.  In  the  Chapter  Ani  says  clearly  :  "  If  I  have 
"  no  heart  I  cannot  eat  of  the  cakes  of  Osiris,  and  I  cannot 
"  sail  up  and  down  the  Nile  to  Abydos  and  Tetu  (Busiris)." 
With  the  restoration  of  his  heart  Ani  gained  the  power  to 
use  his  mind  and  understanding,  to  use  his  hands  and  legs, 
and  to  do  whatever  his  Ka  called  upon  him  to  do,  and  to 
revisit  this  earth  at  pleasure. 

Vignette:  [Wanting  in 
the  Papyrus  of  Ani.]  In 
the  Papyrus  of  Nebseni  the 
Vignette  to  this  Chapter 
shows  us  the  heart  of  the 
deceased  being  weighed 
against  himself  by  an  ape 
in  the  presence  of  Osiris 
(see  illustration).  In  other  papyri  the  deceased  is  seen 
addressing  his  heart,  which  rests  on  a  standard,  or  the 
Vignette  is  simply  a  heart,  or  a  heart-pectoral. 

VOL.  I.  U 


282  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

Text :   [Chapter    XXXb.]      The    Chapter    of    not 

LETTING    THE    HEART    OF    THE    OsiRIS    AnI    BE    DRIVEN    AWAY 

FROM  HIM  IN  Khert-Neter.  This  Chapter  is  one  of  the 
most  important  of  the  Chapters  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead, 
and  it  is  unquestionably  one  of  the  oldest.  It  is  found  on 
coffins  of  the  Xlth  dynasty,  and  in  all  great  papyri  which 
have  not  been  mutilated,  and  upon  hundreds  of  hard  green 
stone  scarabs.  Egyptian  traditions  assign  to  it  great 
antiquity,  one  of  them  declaring  it  was  "  found  "  cut  upon 
the  pedestal  of  a  statue  of  Thoth  in  the  reign  of  Hesepti 
(Semti),  a  king  of  the  1st  dynasty  ;  and  another  assuring  us 
that  it  was  "  found  "  by  Prince  Herutataf,  the  son  of  Khufu 
(Cheops).  The  older  tradition  states  that  it  was  the  work 
of  Thoth  himself  The  copy  of  the  Chapter  given  in  this 
Plate  is,  like  that  found  in  the  Judgment  Scene  (Plate  III), 
incomplete,  but  the  reader  will  find  the  missing  words 
supplied  in  the  hieroglyphic  text.  The  contents  of  the 
Chapter  have  already  been  discussed  in  the  description  of 
the  Judgment,  and  nothing  further  need  therefore  be 
said  here. 

Vignette  :  The  scribe  Ani  arrayed  in  white  apparel, 
hugging  closely  to  his  body  his  Ba-soul,  which  is  in  the 
form  of  a  man-headed  hawk. 

Text :    [Chapter    LXI.]      The    Chapter    of     not 

LETTING    the    Ba-SOUL   OF  A    MAN    BE    SNATCHED    AWAY   FROM 

HIM  IN  Khert-Ni-:ter.  The  title  of  this  Chapter  is  easy 
to  understand,  for  a  belief  has  always  been  common  in 
many  parts  of  Africa  that  a  man's  soul  can  be  bewitched 
out  of  him,  and  that  if  an  enemy  succeeds  in  stealing  the 
soul,  the  man  whose  soul  has  been  stolen  will  die.  But  the 
connection  of  the  title  with  the  contents  of  the  Chapter  is 
not  so  evident,  for  the  deceased  says  that  he  came  forth  from 

the  primeval  waters,  akab  "^  S '^  J  ^^'  ^"<^  ^^  prays 

that  he  may  have  abundance  of  water,  and  have  the  mastery 
over  streams  of  water.  In  the  Papyrus  of  Nefer-uben-f 
this  Chapter  forms  part  of  a  much  longer  composition,  which 
comprises  Chapters  LX,  LXI,  and  LXIl,  and  which  has 
for  its  Vignette  the  picture  of  a  man  washing  out  his  mouth 
by  the  side  of  a  lake  or  stream.  In  the  Saite  Recension 
the  Chapter  has  a  Vignette  with  the  figure  of  a  man  holding 


Of  Obtaining  Air  283 

in  one  hand  a  sail.  The  contents  of  Chapter  LXI  certainly 
refer  to  the  drinking  of  water  in  Khert-Neter,  and  we  can 
only  conclude  that  the  present  title  of  it  is  the  result  of 
some  mistake  or  misunderstanding  of  its  words. 

Vignette  :  The  scribe  Ani,  arrayed  in  white  apparel, 
holding  in  his  left  hand  a  sail  2Z3,  symbolic  of  air  or 
breath. 

Text:  [Chapter  LIV.]  The  Chapter  of  giving 
AIR  TO  THE  scribe  Ani  IN  Khert-Neter.  Ani  identifies 
himself  with  the  Egg  of  the  Great  Cackler,  that  is  to  say, 
with  the  egg  of  the  Sun,  which  was  laid  by  the  great  god 
Keb.  As  the  embryo  inside  the  shell  obtains  air  and 
grows  to  maturity,  so  the  embryo  of  Ani's  spirit-body 
breathes,  and  lives  and  grows  inside  the  tomb,  which  takes 
the  place  of  the  shell  of  the  Egg.     Ani  also  identifies  himself 

with  the  god  Utcha-aabt  ^  'I'^T' J^  "^  5^'  of  whom 
little  is  known.  The  "  dweller  in  his  nest,"  and  "  the  babe," 
are,  of  course,  himself.  In  Chapters  LV  and  LVI,  which 
are  translated  in  the  Appendix,  he  identifies  himself  with 

the  "jackal  of  jackals  "  Pf  J"^  P  ^  J  "^  ^  j'  ^"<^  with 
Shu,  the  god  of  the  air,  and  he  addresses  Tem,  the  god  of 
the  north  wind,  and  beseeches  him  to  give  him  the  breath 
which  is  in  his  nostrils. 

Vignette  :  The  scribe  Ani,  arrayed  in  white  apparel, 
holding  in  his  right  hand  an  unidentified  object  and  in  his 
left  a  staff. 

Text  :  [Chapter  XXIX.]  The  Chapter  of  not 
letting  the  heart  of  a  man  be  taken  away  from  him 
IN  Khert-Neter.  This  Chapter  is  extant  in  three  forms, 
and  the  principal  object  of  all  three  was  to  prevent 
Ani's  heart  from  being  bewitched  away  from  him.  In 
Chapter  XXIXa  the  deceased  identifies  himself  with  the 
"  Lord  of  hearts,  the  slayer  of  the  heart,"  and  with  Horus, 
"  the  dweller  in  hearts."  In  Chapter  XXIXb  he  declares 
that  he  is  Benu,  the  soul  of  Ra,  and  the  Guide  of  the  gods 
of  the  Tuat.  With  the  help  of  this  Chapter  Ani  could 
prevent  the  messenger  of  any  god  from  stealing  his  heart, 
but  he  might  steal  the  hearts  of  others. 

u   2 


284  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

PLATE  XVI 

Vignette  :  The  scribe  Ani,  arrayed  in  white  apparel, 
standing^  with  both  hands  raised  in  the  attitude  of  prayer  to 

his  heart,  which  is  resting  on  a  stand  v-2-.      Facing  him, 

seated  on  the  cubit  of  77iadt  / — ] ,  are  four  bearded  gods,  who 
represent  the  Four  Sons  of  Horus,  Kesta  (Mesta),  Hapi, 
Tuamutef,  and  Oebhsenuf. 

Text:    [CiiAi'TER    XXVI 1.]     The    Chapter   of    not 

LETTING     TPIE     HEART     OF     A      MAN      BE      TAKEN      FROM      HIM 

IN  Khert-Neter.  This  Chapter  is  an  address  to  the  gods 
who  steal  hearts,  and  crush  them,  and  who  reward  a  man 
according  to  the  deeds  of  his  heart.  Ani  calls  on  them 
not  to  touch  his  heart,  because  it  belono-s  to  the  ood  of 
many  names  (Tem,  or  Ra,  or  Thoth).  Ani  declares  that 
his  heart  is  made  new,  that  he  has  power  over  it,  that  it 
and  his  members  obey  him,  and  that  it  shall  never  leave  his 
body.  In  the  Appendix  translations  are  given  of  the 
supplementary  Chapters  XXVIII,  XXIXa,  and  XXXa. 
The  first  part  of  Chapter  XXXa  resembles  that  of  a  part 
of  Chapter  XXXb,  but  the  ending  is  different,  and  the  Sons 
of  Horus  are  entreated  by  the  deceased  to  intercede  for 
him  with  Ra,  and  to  cause  the  terrible  goddess  Nehebka  to 
do  him  no  harm.  The  Vignette  of  Chapter  XXVI 1 1  is  of 
interest,  for  we  see  in  it  a  monster  in  human  form  with  a 
shaggy  mane  and  whiskers  round  his  face  and  a  tail  ;  and 
his  general  appearance  suggests  that  he  was  intended  to 
represent  a  gorilla,  or  chimpanzee,  though  of  course  these 
animals  have  no  tails.  It  is  probable  that  the  artist  drew 
the  monster,  of  which  he  must  have  heard  by  reports  that 
filtered  down  the  Nile  from  the  Southern  Siklan,  and  added 
a  tail  because  he  thought  he  ought  to  have  one. 

.  Vignette  :  The  scribe  Ani  and  his  wife  Tutu  standing 
up  to  their  knees  in  a  canal  or  arm  of  the  Nile,  scooping  up 
water  into  their  mouths  with  their  right  hands.     Ani  holds 

in  his  left  hand  a  sail  -C-^,  symbolic  of  air  or  wind,  and  Tutu 

holds  in  her  left  hand  a  fan    y^.      By  the  side  of  the  water 

two  young  palms  and  a  large  mature  palm  are  growing,  and 
from  the  leafy  crown  of  the  large  palm  hang  two  clusters  of 
ripe  dates. 


Of  Obtaining  Air  285 

Text:  [Chapter  LVIII.]  The  Chapter  of  breathing 

THE    AIR,    AND    OF    HAVING    DOMINION    OVER    THE     WATER    IN 

Khert-Neter.  About  the  meanings  of  the  Vignette  and 
of  the  title  of  this  Chapter  there  is  no  room  for  doubt  ;  they 
refer  to  the  drinking  of  water  and  to  the  breathing  of  air  by 
Ani  in  the  Other  World.  The  text  of  the  Chapter  seems 
to  indicate  that  Ani  wishes  to  enter  into  a  certain  part  of 
the  Other  World,  in  the  company  of  the  Merti  goddesses. 
Some  god,  name  unknown,  asks  him  who  he  is,  what  is  his 
name,  and  where  he  is  going.  Ani  refers  to  a  boat  which 
he  has,  and  repeats  the  magical  names  of  it  and  its  parts. 
The  Chapter  ends  with  a  prayer  for  cakes,  bread,  ale,  and 
flesh,  of  which  he  wishes  to  partake  in  the  temple  of  Anpu. 
This  Chapter  is  not  found  in  other  papyri  containing  the 
Theban  Recension,  and  its  title  in  the  Papyrus  of  Ani 
must  have  been  given  to  it  by  mistake. 

Vignette  :  The  scribe  Ani,  arrayed  in  white  apparel, 

kneelintr  in  adoration  under  the  branches  of  a  lartje   fine 

...  .  ^ 

sycamore  tree,  which  is  growing  by  the  side  of  a  lake  of 

water  [SMI .     Almost  hidden  in  the  branches  is  the  figure  of 

the  goddess  Nut,  who  is  giving  to  Ani  a  table  of  food  with 

one  hand,  and  a  vessel  of  pure  water  with  the  other.     The 

tree  appears  to  be  the  sycamore  fig-tree,  and  to  be  laden 

with  fruit.      This  Vio^nette  suQ^o-ests  that  at  one  time  tree- 

worship  was  common  in   Egypt,  as  it   is   in  certain  other 

parts  of  Africa  at  the  present  day. 

Text :  [Chapter  LIX.]     The  Chapter  of  snuffing 

THE  air,  and  of  HAVING  POWER  OVER  THE  WATER  IN  KhERT- 

Neter.  Ani's  petition  for  the  water  and  air  which  are  in 
Nut,  i.e.,  the  Sky,  of  which  goddess  the  sycamore  was  the 
symbol.  Ani  again  identifies  himself  with  the  Egg  of  the 
Great  Cackler,  with  the  life  in  which  his  own  life  is  bound  up. 

Vignette  :  The  scribe  Ani,  arrayed  in  white  apparel, 
seated  upon  a  chair  of  state  with  a  high  back.  In  his  right 
hand  he  holds  the  KJierp  sceptre,  symbolic  of  his  authority, 
and  in  the  other  his  staff  of  office.  Before  him  is  a  table. 
In  the  Turin  Papyrus  the  deceased  stands  before  a 
sepulchral  shrine. 

Text :  [Chapter  XLIV.]  The  Chapter  of  not 
DYING  A  second  TIME  IN   Khert-Neter.     The  Egyptians 


286  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

believed  that  the  Kau,  or  Doubles  of  the  dead,  lived  on  the 
souls  of  the  offerings  that  were  made  regularly  in  the  tombs 
wherein  their  bodies  were  laid,  and  that  if  for  any  reason 
an  interruption  in  the  supply  of  food  took  place,  the  Kau 
suffered  hunger  and  thirst.  The  Kau  might  wander  about 
and  prolong  their  existence  by  eating  offal  in  the  desert, 
and  by  drinking  dirty  water,  but  unless  the  supply  of 
offerings  was  renewed  they  starved  to  death.  Moreover, 
it  was  possible,  they  also  thought,  that  the  Kau  might  suffer 
death  a  second  time  through  the  displeasure  of  the 
Tchatchau  chiefs  and  the  Sheniu  officials  who  administered 
the  Kingdom  of  Osiris.  This  Chapter  was  written  to  enable 
the  deceased  to  identify  himself  with  the  never-setting,  or 
imperishable,  stars,  and  with  Ra  and  Horus,  who  were 
immortal.  He  who  was  crowned  "  King  of  the  Gods  "  could 
not  die  a  second  time. 

Vignette :  The  mummy  of  the  Osiris  Ani  being 
embraced  by  Anubis,  the  god  of  the  embalmment  chamber 
and  master  of  medical  knowledge. 

Text :  [Chapter  XLV.]  The  Chapter  of  not 
ROTTING  IN  Khert-Neter.  The  object  of  this  Chapter  is 
quite  clear,  namely,  to  prevent  the  mummy  of  the  deceased 
from  rotting  away  through  the  effects  of  improper  or 
unskilful  mummification.  Ani  wished  to  be  mummified  by 
Anubis,  who  carried  out  the  mummification  of  Osiris 
whilst  Isis  recited  spells  that  had  been  composed  for  her 
by  Thoth.  Anubis  embalmed  Osiris  with  such  skill  that 
the  flesh  of  the  god  never  decayed,  or  crumbled  away,  or 
fell  into  dust,  and  the  medicaments  and  swathings  which  he 
employed  in  the  work  were  of  the  finest  quality,  and 
possessed  preservative  properties  in  the  highest  degree. 
The  recital  of  this  Chapter  provided  the  deceased  with  the 
services  of  Anubis.  Chapters  CLXXV  and  CLXXVI  bear 
the  same  title,  and  were  written  with  the  same  object  as 
this  Chapter. 

Vignette  :  A  doorway,  presumably  the  doorway  of  the 
tomb.  By  one  jamb  stands  the  Heart-soul  of  Ani  in  the 
form  of  a  man-headed  hawk,  and  by  the  other  a  Benu  bird, 
which  symbolized  the  soul  of  Ra. 

Text:  [Chapter  XLVI.]  The  Chapter  of  not 
perishing,  and  of  becoming  alive  in  Khert-Neter.    The 


Of  Preventing  Decay  of  the  Body  287 

object  of  this  Chapter  was  to  enable  the  spiritual  members 
of  Ani    to   emerge    from    his    body    and    from    his    tomb, 

and    to  join    the    Henmemet    spirits  i    vj  ^^^^m'    ^^ 

m  m\  ^C  ^  J)  ' '  ^^^  ^^  ^^^  oldest  orders  of  spirits, 
who  dwelt  in  heaven.  It  is  possible  that  the  Benu 
bird  may  here  symbolize  the  Spirit-soul  of  Ani,  which, 
unlike  the  Heart-soul,  could  never  be  destroyed  or  die. 
The  Heart-soul,  as  we  have  seen,  might  in  certain  circum- 
stances suffer  the  second  death.  The  Benu  bird  as  the 
incarnation  of  the  Soul  of  the  Sun-god  imparted  some  of  its 
character  of  immortality  to  the  mortal  soul  of  Ani. 

Vignette  :  The  scribe  Ani,  arrayed  in  white  linen 
garments,  walking  away  from  the  block  of  slaughter  in 
Khert-Neter,  which  somewhat  resembles  a  guillotine. 
Those  who  were  to  be  slaughtered  placed  their  necks 
between  the  two  upright  posts,  and  the  huge  knife  descend- 
ing upon  them  cut  off  their  heads. 

Text :  [Chapter  La.]  The  Chapter  of  not  enter- 
ing    INTO     THE     CHAMBER     OF     THE     BLOCK     OF     EXECUTION. 

This  text  states  that  the  vertebrae  of  the  neck  that  join 
Ani's  head  to  his  body  were  knitted  together  in  heaven  for 
him  by  Ra  in  primeval  times.  This  being  so,  it  is  impossible 
for  any  hostile  god  to  separate  the  vertebrae  of  his  neck, 
or  to  remove  his  head  from  his  body.  Curiously  enough, 
it  is  also  said  that  Set  knitted  together  the  vertebrae  of 
Ani's  neck,  just  as  Ra  did.  Now  Set  succeeded  in  hacking 
off  the  head  of  Osiris,  and,  as  he  might  cut  off  Ani's  head 
also,  Ani  relies  on  the  recital  of  this  Chapter  to  give  his 
body  strength  to  resist  any  possible  attack  of  Set.  The 
beheading  of  the  wicked  was  performed  nightly  in  the 
torture  chambers  of  the  Other  World  under  the  direction 

of  Shesmu  ^  v>  A^ ,  the  terrible  executioner  of  Osiris. 


The  recital  of  this  Chapter  also  secured  for  Ani  immunity 
from  the  passing  upon  him  of  the  sentence  of  beheading  by 
Osiris. 

PLATE  XVII 

Vignette :     Ani,    arrayed    in    white    linen    garments, 
standing  with   his  hands  raised  in   entreaty  or  prayer  to 

three  gods,  each  of  whom  holds  a  sceptre  1   in  his  right 


288  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

hand  and  the  symbol  of  "life  "  in  his  left.      In  a  Vignette 

published  by  Naville,  a  figure  of  the  Tet  H ,  or  symbol  of 

the  uterus  of  I  sis,  is  seen  grasping  the  left  arm  of  the 
deceased  with  a  pair  of  human  arms  and  hands. 

Text:    [Chapter    XCIII.]     The    Chapter    of    not 

LETTING    A    MAN    BE   TRANSPORTED   TO   THE    EaST   IN    KhERT- 

Neter.  The  meaning  of  the  text  of  this  Chapter  is  com- 
paratively plain.  It  opens  with  an  address  to  the  Phallus 
of  Ra,  and  continues  with  a  prayer  in  which  Ani  begs  that 
he  may  not  be  carried  by  force  to  the  East,  or  be  made  to 
take  part  in  the  festivals  that  are  held  there.  The  Kingdom 
of  Osiris,  we  know,  was  situated  to  the  west  of  the  Nile, 
and  it  is  possible  that  the  only  object  of  the  recital  of  this 
Chapter  was  to  prevent  Ani  from  being  set  on  the  wrong 
road,  and  from  arriving  at  the  place  of  slaughter  instead 
of  the  realms  of  joy  of  Osiris.  On  the  other  hand,  it  seems 
that  there  must  be  some  meaning  in  the  Chapter  which  we 
have  not  grasped,  and  the  mention  of  the  phallus  of  Ra 
and  the  Vitrnette  of  the  o-enital  oro^ans  of  Isis  seem  to 
suggest  that  the  East  was  a  place  of  abomination  to  the 
Egyptians,  because  sexual  orgies  of  an  irregular  character 
were  carried  on  there. 

Vignette :  The  scribe  Ani,  arrayed  in  white  linen 
apparel,  standing  and  addressing  a  god.  who  has  his  face 
turned  round  behind  him,  and  who  is  seated  in  a  boat  ; 
Ani  grasps  his  palette  in  his  left  hand.     This  is  the  god 

Herfhaf  "^   '  'W>^^^,  who  was  the  celestial  Ferryman,  and 

who  ferried  over  the  souls  of  the  righteous  to  the  Island  of 
Fire  where  Osiris  reigned.  None  but  the  just  could  enter 
his  boat,  and  his  face  was  turned  round  in  order  that  he 
might  see  what  was  going  on  behind  his  back,  and  prevent 
improperly  qualified  souls  from  making  use  of  his  boat.  In 
the  Turin  Papyrus  there  is  a  table  of  offerings  in  the  boat, 

and  in  front  of  the  boat  itself  is  the  symbol  of  the  East  tK  . 

It  is  not  clear  why  Ani  is  grasping  his  palette,  and  in  the 
Turin  Papyrus  the  deceased  has  both  hands  empty. 

Text:  [Chapter  XCIIIa.]  Another  Chapter.  In 
other  papyri  these  two  Chapters  form  one,  and  the  Turin 
Papyrus  suggests  that  it  should  properly  only  have  one 
Vignette,  namely,  that  in  which  Herfhaf  appears. 


Of  Keeping  the  Head  on  the  Body  289 

Vignette :  The  scribe  Ani  addressing  three  gods. 
The  Turin  Papyrus  proves  that  the  Vignette  which  is 
described  above  under  Chapter  XCIII  really  belongs  to 
Chapter  XLIII,  and  that  either  the  artist  who  illustrated 
the  Papyrus  of  Ani  painted  it  in  the  wrong  place,  or  the 
scribe  misplaced  the  text. 

Text:    [Chapter    XLIII.]      The    Chapter    of    not 

LETTING    THE    HEAD   OF   A    MAN    BE   CUT    OFF    HIM    IN     KhERT- 

Neter.  In  this  Chapter  Ani  identifies  himself  with  the 
Great  One  and  the  Son  of  Fire,  to  whom  his  head  was 
given  after  it  had  been  cut  off.  Since  the  head  of  Osiris 
was  cut  off,  Ani  could  not  expect  to  avoid  a  similar  fate, 
but  the  head  of  Osiris  was  not  taken  away  from  him,  and 
Ani  prays  that  his  head  may  never  be  carried  away,  for  he 
is  Osiris  himself.  It  is  now  well  known  that  in  primitive 
times  in  Egypt  the  bodies  of  the  dead  were  dismembered 
before  burial,  probably  as  the  result  of  religious  beliefs. 
This  is  clear  from  passages  like  the  following,  wherein  we 
read  that  the  s'ods  : — 


Give  to  thee  thy  head,  a a   '         ®  '^^^^^  • 

Present    to    thee    thy    n  W  ^  (]  ^^"^  rl  t1  ri 

bones,  ^-^J^l'^^^^^' 

Collect  thy  members,     c:^>  /^  ^^^  I  "^^  J^    . 

Bring  to  thee  thy  heart  n  q  ^'^"^^  n  ^'^^^  =     n   a      ^-=>  1 

in  thy  body,  4  Jj   o    I   ^^=^      J  "^^^.M^  ^:^* 

As  the  practice  of  embalming  grew  and  spread  in  Egypt 
in  early  dynastic  times,  as  the  result  of  the  growth  of  the 
cult  of  Osiris,  the  custom  of  dismembering  the  body 
gradually  fell  into  disuse,  and  at  length  the  only  portions 
of  the  body  which  were  removed  from  it  during  the  process 
of  embalming  were  the  viscera,  and  these  were  mummified 
separately.  At  the  time  when  the  Papyrus  of  Ani  was 
written  there  was  little  chance  of  the  head  beine  severed 
from  the  mummy  wilfully,  nevertheless  Ani  had  the  Chapter 
included  in  his  papyrus,  wishing  to  run  no  risk  of  dis- 
memberment, accidental  or  otherwise. 

^  Pyramid  of  Pepi  I,  1.  no. 


290 


The  Papyrus  of  Ani 


Vignette  :  The  mummy  of  Ani  lying  on  its  bier,  with 
a  stand  containing  burning  incense  at  the  head  and  at  the 
foot  of  it.  Above  the  mummy  hovers  his  Heart-soul  in  the 
form  of  a  man-headed  hawk,  holding  in  his  claws  shen  Q, 
the  symbol  of  the  sun's  course  and  of  eternity.  This  the 
soul  is  presenting  to  its  body  with  the  view  of  making  it 
everlasting. 

Text :  [Chapter  LXXXIX.]  The  Chapter  of  causing 

THE     heart-soul     TO     BE    UNITED    TO    ITS    BODY    IN     KhERT- 

Neter.  By  the  recital  of  this  very  important  Chapter  Ani 
hoped  to  gain  possession  of  his  Heart-soul  (Ba)  and  of  his 
Spirit-soul  (Khu),  and  to  effect  the  union   of  the   former 

with   its  material  body  khat  '^p,,  and  the  union  of  the 

latter  with  its  Spirit-body  scth  |  U .     Heart-soul  and  body 

would  then  exist  eternally  upon  the  earth,  and  the  Spirit- 
soul  and  its  ethereal  and  indestructible  envelope  would  have 
their  being  among  the  gods.  The  Rubric  of  the  Chapter 
orders  that  an  amulet  in  the  form  of  a  Heart-soul  made  of 
gold  and  inlaid  with  precious  stones  shall  be  tied  to  the  neck 
of  the  mummy.  If  this  were  done  it  was  believed  that  the 
gods  would  compel  Ani's  Heart-soul  to  visit  its  body 
regularly,  and  so  prevent  it  from  decaying,  and  that  both 
Heart-soul  and  body  would  be  able  to  visit  during  the 
seasons  of  festivals  the  city  of  Anu,  where  Heart-souls  weie 
united  to  their  bodies  by  thousands.  In  the  Turin  Papyrus 
it  is  expressly  stated  that  the  presence  of  such  an  amulet  on 
the  body  would  prevent  it  from  decaying,  and  would  prevent 
the  Heart-soul  from  leaving  it. 

Vignette  :  The  Heart-soul  of  the  scribe  Ani,  in  the 
form  of  a  man-headed  bird,  standing 
in  front  of  the  door  of  his  tomb. 
The  papyri  afford  many  variants  of 
the  Vignette  of  this  most  interesting 
Chapter,  In  the  Papyrus  of  Khari 
(Fig.  i)  we  see  the  deceased  standing 
before    his    tomb,    of  which    he    has 

opened   the  door  I,  and   his    Heart- 

'  KiG,    I. 

soul   in    the   form    of  a  man-headed 

hawk  flying  out  to  meet  him.     In  the  Papyrus  of  Amenhetep 


Of  Obtaining  Freedom  for  the  Soul         291 


Fig.  2. 


(Fig.   2)  we   see   the  deceased    actually  opening   the   door 

of  a  shrine  resting  on  the  cubit  of  77iaat  iC=),  and  behind 

him  stands  his  Heart-soul  with  the 
symbol  of  "  life "  above  it.  The 
third  variant  (Fig.  3),  from  the 
Papyrus  of  Nefer-uben-f,  is  very 
Q         i^^       ^  interesting.     The  building  here  re- 

\  J^  /    W      1  presented    is    not   a    tomb,  but    an 

ordinary  house,  above  which  shines 
the  noon-day  sun.  Walking  away 
from  the  house  is  a  figure  of  the 
deceased  coloured  black,  and  above 

his  head  hovers  his  Heart-soul.     The  black  figure  is  the 

Ka,   or    Double  of  the   deceased, 

which  as  we  have  seen  is  always 

intimately     connected     with     the 

Heart-soul.     The   Ka  died  if  the 

Heart-soul   died,   for   it   depended 

for  its  existence  on  the  Heart-soul, 

which    maintained    itself    on    the 

offerings   that   were   made    in    the 

tomb.     The    connection    between 

the    Heart-soul    and    the   Ka  was 

so  close  that  if  the  former  were  imprisoned  in  the  tomb, 

the  latter  suffered  imprisonment  also. 

Text:  [Chapter  XCL]  The  Chapter  of  not  letting 

THE    SOUL   OF  A    MAN    BE    SHUT    UP    IN    KhERT-NeTER.       This 

Chapter  is  an  address  to  the  Soul-god,  i.e.y  Osiris,  who  is 
entreated  to  make  a  path  for  the  dual-soul  of  Ani.  Ani 
rejoices  in  the  fact  that  he  is  an  "  equipped  Spirit-soul  " 

'^,  ^  A  ""^^ ,  which  means,  presumably,  that  his  dual- 
soul  is  complete  now  that  he  is  master  of  his  Heart-soul, 
or  now,  as  we  read  in  the  Papyrus  of  Nu,  that  his  Spirit- 
soul,  and  Heart-soul,  and  Ka,  or  Double,  are  re-united. 
The  Rubric  states  that  the  Spirit-soul  that  possesses  a 
knowledge  of  this  Chapter  shall  not  be  stopped  at  any  door 
in  Khert-Neter,  and  that  it  shall  go  in  and  out  of  every 
part  of  this  region  millions  of  times. 

Vignettes  :  (i)  Ani  standing  by  the  door  of  his  tomb  ; 
(2)  Ani  walking  out  of  the  tomb,  with  his  Heart-soul 
hoverinor  above  his  head. 


Fig. 


292  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

Text:   [Chapter  XCII.]     The  Chapter  of  opening 

THE  TOMB  TO  THE  HeART-SOUL  AND  THE  SHADOW,  AND  OF 
COMING    FORTH     BY    DAY,    AND    OF    HAVING    POWER    OVER    THE 

LEGS.  The  recital  of  this  Chapter  procured  for  Ani  the 
power  to  leave  the  tomb  on  the  "  day  of  souls,"  i.e..  All 
Souls'  Day,  and  to  see  Ra  seated  in  his  boat,  and  to  behold 
the  Great  God  on  the  day  when  souls  were  "  counted  up" 
(or  inspected,  or  judged),  and  to  sit  down  among"  the  Chiefs 
in  the  Other  World.  A  soul  that  possessed  a  knowledge  of 
this  Chapter  had  no  need  to  fear  the  opposition  of  the  fiends 
who  fetter  the  members  of  Spirit-souls,  and  shut  in  Spirit- 
souls,  and  who  wished  to  do  harm  to  it. 


PLATE  XVIII 

Vignette  :  The  boat  containing  the  shrine,  or  ark,  of 
the  god  Seker,  or  Death  personified,  resting  upon  its  sledge  ; 
before  it  kneels  the  Osiris  Ani,  with  both  hands  grasping 
a  part  of  the  boat. 

Text :  [Chapter  LXXIV.]  The  Chapter  of  lift- 
ing   UP    THE  FEET  {i.e.,  OF    WALKING),  AND    OF  COMING    FORTH 

UPON  THE  EARTH.  This  Chapter  contains  a  petition  to 
Seker,  who  had  the  power  to  stand  on  his  feet  in  Khert- 
Neter,  for  strength  to  walk.  Ani  identifies  himself  with  the 
god  who  illumines  the  great  constellation  of  the  Thigh, 
i.e.,  the  Great  Bear  in  the  northern  sky.  The  Thigh  was 
in  the  older  mythology  associated  with  Set,  who,  it  will  be 
remembered,  was  wounded  in  the  thigh  by  Horus  because 
he  had  swallowed  the  crescent  moon  one  evening  when 
wandering  about  the  sky.  The  lack  of  power  to  walk 
which  characterized  the  dead  body  was  associated  by  the 
Egyptians  with  the  evil  influence  of  Set.  This  could  only 
be  overcome  by  the  power  of  the  god  of  light,  i.e.,  the  Rye 
of  Horus,  and,  when  Ani  had  identified  himself  with  this 
god,  the  power  to  stand  on  his  feet  and  walk  was  assured 
to  him. 

Vignette  :  The  Osiris  Ani  standing  before  the  Moun- 
tain of  Amenti,  by  which  arc  placed  a  vessel  of  drink  and 
a  loaf  of  bread. 

Text  :  [Chapter  VIII.]  The  Chapter  of  passing 
THROUGH  Amenti,  and  of  [coming  forth   by  day].      In 


Of  Obtaining  Life  after  Death  293 

this  Chapter  Ani  claims  the  power  to  pass  through  Amenti 
because  he  is  Osiris,  and  because  he  has  delivered  the  Eye 
of  Horus,  that  is  to  say,  he  has  secured  for  himself  the 
attributes  and  strength  of  Thoth.  Ani  also  identifies 
himself  with  the  Moon-god,  who  was  a  form  of  Osiris  and 
the  symbol  and  type  of  new  birth,  or  resurrection.  This 
Chapter  is  important  as  showing  that  Osiris  was  certainly 
regarded  as  the  god  of  the  moon  under  the  XVI I  Ith  dynasty, 
and  that  the  death  of  the  body  was  compared  to  the  period 
of  the  month  during  which  the  moon  was  invisible.  As 
surely  as  the  moon  reappeared  in  the  sky,  so  surely  would 
Ani  appear  in  heaven  ;  and  his  course  through  Amenti 
would  be  as  triumphant  as  that  of  the  moon  through  the 
heavens. 

Vignette  :  [Wanting  in  the  Papyrus  of  Ani.] 

Text:  [Chapter  II.]  The  Chapter  of  Coming 
Forth  by  Day,  and  of  living  after  death.  This 
Chapter  is  an  address  to  the  One  who  makes  his  presence 
visible  by  shining  from  the  moon.  Among  modern  African 
nations  he  is  called  the  "  spirit  of  the  moon."  Ani  appeals  to 
him  as  the  great  symbol  of  the  resurrection,  and  as  the 
beinp-  who  revivified  himself,  and  who  has  oathered  about 
him  the  spirits  who  share  his  nature  and  his  attributes. 
The  favour  of  the  god  of  the  moon  enabled  Ani  to  make 
his  way  successfully  through  the  Other  World  to  the  realm 
of  Osiris,  and  this  Chapter  is  one  of  the  oldest  and  most 
important  spells  in  the  Book  of  the  Dead. 

Vignette  :  A  Ram-god,  symbolic  of  the  Soul-god  of 
Tetu,  standing  upon  a  sepulchral  building,  which  rests  on 
a  mat.  He  has  on  his  head  a  high  crown  with  plumes, 
which,  together  with  a  disk,  rests  upon  a  pair  of  long 
horizontal  horns.  This  ram  is  identical  in  form  with  the 
ram  that  was  the  incarnation  of  Khnemu,  the  great  god  of 
the  First  Cataract.  Before  him  is  a  stand  with  offerings 
upon  it,  and  in  front  of  him  is  Ani,  arrayed  in  white  apparel, 
with  his  hands  raised  in  adoration. 

Text  :  [Chapter  IX.]  The  Chapter  of  Coming 
Forth  by  Day  having  passed  through  Amhet.  The 
recital  of  this  Chapter  by  Ani  gave  him  power  to  pass 
through  the  awful  chamber  of  Amhet  in  the  kingdom  of 


294  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

Seker.  the  god  of  Death,  and  to  traverse  every  path  in 
Dead-land  successfully,  and  to  emerge  before  Osiris  sound 
and  well.     Ani  cries  out  in  triumph  :  "  I  have  stabbed  (or, 

cut  out.  this  heart  of  Suti  "fH    ^    ^    °    ^'1^"J. 

which  is  only  a  figurative  way  of  saying  :  "  I  have  slain 
death."  In  the  land  of  Death  Suti,  i.e..  Set,  ruled  supreme, 
and  every  soul  who  entered  unprovided  with  the  knowledge 
of  the  words  of  this  Chapter  suffered  death,  final  and 
absolute.  But  Ani  has  traversed  his  domain,  and  slain  the 
heart  of  Set  by  means  of  these  words,  and  he  confidently 
calls  upon  the  gods  and  the  Spirit-souls  in  the  kingdom  of 
the  Soul-god  to  make  a  path  for  him  among  them,  as  the 
beings  have  done  in  Dead-land. 

Vignette  :  The  scribe  Ani,  arrayed  in  white  apparel, 
and  holding  in  his  right  hand  a  symbol  of  his  office  and  in 
the  other  a  long  staff  such  as  was  carried  by  high  officials, 
standing  before  the  door  of  a  house. 

Text:     [Chapter     CXXXII.]       The     Chapter    of 

MAKING   A    MAN    TO   RETURN   TO   SEE   HIS  HOUSE    UPON    EARTH. 

The  recital  of  this  Chapter  enabled  Ani  to  revisit  his  house 
upon  the  earth.  By  means  of  it  he  identified  himself  with 
the  Lion-god  and  with  the  Eye  of  Horus,  and  was  enabled 
thereby  to  transform  himself  into  its  light,  and  to  come 
upon  the  earth  and  to  look  upon  his  old  home.  In  the 
Vignette  to  the  Chapter  in  the  Brocklehurst  Papyrus  we 
see  the  Heart-soul  of  the  deceased  hovering  above  the  house, 
close  to  which  is  a  tree.  One  papyrus  (Naville,  op.  cit., 
Bd.  I,  Bl.  145)  adds  the  apparently  irrelevant  words: 
"  Behold,  I  have  advanced,  I  have  not  been  found  light  in 

"  the  Balance,  which  is  rid  of  my  case  "  ^J^  ^\   7^  v^  (1  R 


Vignette  :  The  scribe  Ani,  arrayed  in  white  apparel, 
spearing  a  serpent. 

Text:  [Chapter  X  or  XLVIII.]  The  Chapter  of 
A  man  Coming  Forth  by  Day  against  his  foes  in 
Khert-Neter.      By  the  recital  of  this  Chapter  Ani  obtained 


Of  Revisiting  the  Old  Home  295 

the  protection  of  the  Great  Spirit-soul,  i.e.,  Osiris,  and  the 
use  of  his  words  of  power  ;  these  enabled  him  to  eat  with 
his  mouth,  and  to  masticate  his  food  with  his  jaws.  The 
appositeness  of  the  latter  remark  is  not  evident.  In  the 
Papyrus  of  luau  (ed.  Naville,  Plate  XI)  the  deceased  is 
seen  driving"  a  spear  into  the  neck  of  an  enemy  in  human 
form,  who  is  kneeling  before  him,  and  who  has  his  arms 
tied  at  the  elbows  behind  his  back.  It  is  possible  that  we 
have  here  a  reminiscence  of  the  old  cannibalistic  custom  of 
eating  an  enemy,  and  the  allusion  to  the  mouth  and  jaws 
seems  to  support  this  view. 

PLATE  XIX 

Vignette  :  The  Boat  of  Ra  resting  on  the  sky  i;=q. 
The  god  is  hawk-headed,  and  has  the  solar  disk  on  his 
head.  On  the  mat  hanging  over  the  prow  of  the  boat  is 
seated  a  figure  of  Harpokrates,  and  before  him  stands  Ani, 
with  his  hands  raised  in  adoration  of  the  god. 

Text :  [Chapter  XV.]     A  Hymn  of  Praise   to    Ra 

WHEN      HE      RISETH     UPON      THE      HORIZON,     AND      WHEN      HE 

SETTETH  IN  THE  [land  of]  LIFE.  This  Section  of  the 
Book  of  the  Dead  contains  hymns  to  the  Sun-god,  some  of 
which  were  sungf  in  the  morningr  and  some  in  the  evening-. 
The  subjects  of  all  these  hymns  are  :  (i)  The  strength, 
greatness,  and  glory  of  the  Sun-god,  and  the  joy  with  which 
he  traversed  the  heavens  in  his  morningr  and  eveningr  boats. 
(2)  The  homage  which  is  paid  to  him  on  earth,  and  the 
reverent  worship  accorded  to  him  by  the  gods.  {3)  The 
overthrow  of  Aapep,  the  Arch-fiend,  and  of  all  the  devils 
who  aid  him  in  his  attempt  to  obstruct  the  rising  of  Ra  in 
the  sky.  (4)  The  attributes  of  the  Sun-god,  and  the  things 
which  he  has  created. 

Vignette :  The  scribe  Ani,  arrayed  in  white  apparel, 
with  his  hands  raised  in  adoration  of  the  god  ;  behind  him 
stands  his  wife,  "the  Osiris,  the  lady  of  the  house,  the 
singing-woman  of  Amen,  Tutu."  She  is  dressed  as  before, 
and  holds  in  her  hands  the  symbols  of  her  office. 

Text :  A  short  hymn  to  Osiris,  the  everlasting  Lord, 
Un-Nefer-Heru-Khuti,  who  is  Ptah-Seker-Tem  in  Anu, 
and  the  creator  of  the  gods  of  Memphis,  and  the  Guide  of 


296  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

the  orods  in  heaven,  and  who  is  here  addressed  as  the  Q-od 
who  raises  up  the  dead  to  look  upon  him,  and  who  bestows 
upon  them  the  air  that  they  breathe.  This  is  followed  by 
a  Litany  containing  nine  short  sections,  after  each  of  which 
were  repeated  a  petition  by  Ani  for  power  to  continue  his 
journey  in  the  Other  World  in  safety,  and  a  declaration 
that  his  words  were  true,  that  he  had  not  told  lies  knowingly 
nor  committed  any  fraudulent  or  deceitful  act.  This  Litany 
in  the  form  in  which  it  here  appears  is  found  in  no  other 
Theban  papyrus  of  the  period. 

PLATE  XX 

Vignette  :  Osiris,  in  the  form  of  a  mummy  standing  in 
a  shrine,  with  Isis.      He  wears  the  Crown  of  the  South,  and 

holds  in  his  hands  ^/\  1  f,  symbols  of  sovereignty  and 
dominion.  Isis  embraces  the  body  of  the  god  with  her 
right  arm. 

Text :  [Chapter  XV.]     A    Hymn  of    Praise  to  Ra 

WHEN    HE    RISETH    IN   THE   EASTERN    PART   OF   HEAVEN.       This 

interesting  composition  contains  a  series  of  addresses  to  the 
Sun-god  among  which  are  several  short  personal  prayers 
that  are  put  into  the  mouth  of  Ani  himself.  It  is  important 
to  note  that  Ani  wishes  to  appear  in  the  sky  with  the  Sun- 
god  when  he  rises  in  the  morning,  and  to  sail  with  him  in 
the  Antchet  and  Sektet  Boats,  and  to  enter  with  him  into 
the  night-sky  when  he  sets  upon  this  world.  Thus  Ani 
becomes  a  worshipper  of  Ra,  and  a  devout  votary  of  the 
Sun-god,  and  it  seems  as  if  he  will  be  content  with  nothing 
less  than  living  in  the  absolute  presence  of  the  god  himself 
The  lio:ht  of  Ra  is  to  draw  him  forth  from  the  tomb,  and  to 
renew  the  life  of  all  his  members,  and  Ani  beseeches  the 
god  to  raise  him  to  life  again,  because,  he  says  :  "  I  am  one 
"  of  those  who  worshipped  thee  when  thou  livedst  upon  the 
"  earth."  It  is  difficult  at  first  sight  to  reconcile  his 
adherence  to  the  cult  of  Ra  with  his  belief  in  Osiris,  and 
to  understand  how  he  could  live  in  the  Boat  of  Ra  all  day 
and  yet  be  a  loyal  servant  of  Osiris  carrying  out  the  behests 
of  that  god,  at  the  same  time.  The  true  explanation  of  the 
matter  is  that  Ra  and  Osiris  are  only  two  forms  of  one  god. 
Ra  was  the  form  which  that  god  assumed  during  the  day- 
time, and  Osiris   was  the   form   which  he  took  during  the 


Hymn  to  Ra  297 

hours  of  the  night.  The  sun  was  the  habitation  of  this  god 
during  the  day,  and  the  moon  was  his  dwelUng  place  during 
the  night. 

The  second  section  of  the  Hymn  contains  meditations 
upon  the  greatness  and  majesty  of  the  god  of  the  sky. 
Having  once  entered  upon  his  course  he  follows  it  by  a  law 
that  cannot  be  altered.  As  he  passes  over  the  sky  with 
irresistible  force  every  face  watches  the  symbol  of  the  god 
who  makes  himself  visible  to  all  men  at  dawn  and  at  even. 
The  strength  of  his  light  and  the  variety  of  its  colours  can 
neither  be  told  nor  described.  The  god  who  is  invisible 
by  day  because  of  the  dazzling  splendour  in  which  he  is 
enshrined  is  One,  and  one  only,  and  it  is  only  through  his 
own  will  and  word  that  he  becomes  the  Prince  of  Heaven. 
The  speed  of  the  Sun-god  made  the  author  of  the  hymn  to 
marvel,  for  in  one  moment  the  god  travels  a  distance  which 
it  would  take  a  man  millions  of  years  to  accomplish  ;  and 
by  his  journeying  the  hours  of  the  night  as  well  as  those  of 
the  day  are  numbered.  Equally  worthy  of  wonder  is  the 
daily  birth  of  Ra,  whose  members  are  fashioned  and  whose 
body  is  born  into  the  sky  without  any  pain  arising  in  the 
being  of  his  creator. 

PLATE  XXI 

[Chapter  XV — contimted.^  The  great  god,  the 
begetter  and  maker  of  Ra,  is  the  creator  of  eternity,  and 
is  mightier  than  the  gods  ;  to  him  Ani  gives  his  heart 
unhesitatingly.  Moreover,  this  god  is  almighty,  for  he  is 
able  to  overthrow  all  the  powers  of  evil  and  to  stablish  his 
throne,  despite  the  powers  of  wickedness  and  darkness  ; 
and  he  can  destroy  all  sin.  Therefore  to  him  Ani  appeals 
to  make  his  word  truth  in  Khert-Neter,  and  to  make  him 
sinless  therein.  Only  by  his  help  can  Ani  hope  to  obtain 
a  place  with  the  vassals  of  the  Spirit-souls  of  Ra,  and  to 
live  among  the  souls  in  the  Land  of  Holiness  ;  unless  the 
Sun-god  makes  to  prosper  his  journey  he  can  never  hope 
to  arrive  safely  in  Sekhet-Aaru.  The  two  paragraphs  at 
the  end  of  the  hymn  suggest  that  the  Sun-god  is  speaking 
to  Ani,  for  the  text  reads  :  "  Thou  shalt  appear  in  heaven, 
"  thou  shalt  traverse  the  sky,  thou  shalt  be  side  by  side 
"  with  the  grods  of  the  stars,"  and  he  is  assured  that  he  shall 
have  a  place  in  the  Boat  of  the  Sun,  and  shall  see  the  Two 

VOL.  I.  X 


298  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

Fishes,  the  Abtu  and  the  Ant,  performing  their  evolutions 
by  the  prow  of  the  Boat,  and  shall  behold  Thoth  and  Maat 
directing  the  Boat,  and  Horus  acting  as  its  steersman.  And 
he  shall  be  with  the  gods  who  welcome  Ra. 

Vignette  :  Ra,  hawk-headed,  with  the  solar  disk  upon 
his  head  and  the  symbol  of  "  life  "  upon  his  knees,  seated  on 
viaclt  in  one  of  the  Boats  of  Ra  which  rests  upon  heaven  ; 
before  him  in  the  boat  stands  Ani  with  his  hands  raised 
in  adoration.  On  the  mat  that  falls  over  the  prow  of  the 
boat  a  swallow  is  perched. 

Text :  [Chapter  CXXXIII.]  The  tide  of  this  Chapter 
is  wanting,  and  the  only  note  at  the  beginning  of  the  text  is 
to  the  effect  that  the  Chapter  is  to  be  recited  on  the  ' '  day 
of  the  moon,"  i.e.,  on  the  first  day  of  the  New  Moon.  In 
other  papyri  it  is  called  the  "  Book  of  making  perfect  the 
"  Spirit-soul  in  Khert-Neter  in  the  presence  of  the  Great 
"  Company  of  the  Gods."  The  text  refers  to  the  strength 
and  soundness  of  the  body  of  Ra,  and  to  his  triumphant 
journey  towards  Amenti,  to  which  he  comes  in  a  re-con- 
stituted body  daily.  The  recital  of  this  Chapter  renewed 
the  members  and  life  of  Ani  as  those  of  Ra  were  renewed, 
and  secured  for  him  a  welcome  from  the  gods  similar  to  that 
accorded  to  Ra  himself.  Moreover,  it  prevented  him  from 
remaining  inert  in  the  earth,  and  gave  him  the  power  to 
hear  and  to  see  everything  said  and  done  in  Khert-Neter. 
Above  all,  it  transformed  the  flesh  of  Ani  into  the  divine 
flesh  of  Ra,  and  when  he  seated  himself  in  the  Boat  of 
Ra  the  gods  believed  that  they  were  looking  upon  Ra 
himself. 

PLATE  XXII 

Vignette  to  the  Rubric  :  The  god  Ra,  hawk-headed, 
with  the  solar  disk  upon  his  head  and  the  symbol  of  "  life  " 

•T",  upon  his  knees,  seated  on  rnaat  in  one  of  the  Boats  of 

Ra  which  rests  on  heaven.  The  paddles,  which  are  fastened 
to  hawk-headed  supports,  have  curved  handles  in  the  form  of 
the  uraei  of  I  sis  and  Nephthys,  and  the  Boat  is  protected 
by  an  utchat  amulet  on  the  port  bow.  In  front  of  the  Boat 
is  a  "  heaven  of  stars." 

Rubric  :    The    recital    of  the   above    Chapter    would 
compel  the  gods  to  mistake  Ani  for  Ra,  provided  that  the 


Hymn  to  Ra  299 

directions  given  in  the  Rubric  were  obeyed  :  "  Make  a 
"  model  of  the  boat  of  Ra  seven  cubits  long,  put  in  it 
"  figures  of  the  gods  and  a  figure  of  Ra,  and  paint  a 
"  representation  of  the  starry  sky,  and  purify  the  same 
"  with  natron  [water]  and  incense.  Then  make  a  figure 
"  of  Ani  and  set  him  in  the  boat  with  the  other  figures, 
"  and  the  dead  shall  prostrate  themselves  before  him,  and 
"  the  gods  see  in  him  a  god  like  unto  themselves.  The 
"  ceremonies  connected  with  this  Chapter  must  be  per- 
"  formed  with  great  secrecy,  and  no  woman  may  be 
"  present ;  no  one,  in  fact,  except  the  father  or  the  son  of 
"  him  that  performeth  them." 

Vignette  :  The  god  Ra,  hawk-headed,  with  the  solar 
disk  upon  his  head  and  the  symbol  of  life  on  his  knees, 
seated  on  the  emblem  of  "  truth  "  f — 1,  in  a  long  boat, 
which  rests  upon  heaven.  On  the  port  bow  is  the  amulet  of 
the  utchat,  and  in  the  boat  itself  is  a  huge  disk,  presumably 
that  of  Ra.  In  the  older  papyri,  e.g.,  the  Papyrus  of 
Nebseni,  this  Boat  of  Ra  is  filled  with  the  figures  of  the 
gods  Shu.Tefnut,  Keb,  Nut,  Osiris,  Isis,  Horus,  and  Hathor, 
and  perched  on  the  prow  is  the  hawk  of  Horus,  wearing 
the  White  Crown  and  holding  a  whip.  In  the  Turin 
Papyrus  the  Boat  contains  the  hawk  of  Horus  and  nine 
gods,  and  behind  them  is  the  huge  disk.  In  the  Nebseni 
Papyrus  the  deceased  stands  in  adoration  outside  the  Boat, 
but  in  the  Turin  Papyrus  he  stands  in  the  Boat  itself. 

Text :  [Chapter  CXXXIV.]  A  Hymn  of  Praise 
TO  Ra  on  the  day  of  the  month  wherein  he  saileth 
IN  THE  Boat.  This  title  shows  that  the  Chapter  was 
intended  at  one  time  to  be  recited  on  the  first  day  of  the 
New  Moon,  but  in  several  old  papyri  it  is  entitled  "  Another 
Chapter  of  making  perfect  the  Spirit-soul."  The  object  of 
the  recital  of  the  Chapter  was  to  destroy  the  enemies  of 
Ra  and  of  the  deceased.  In  the  opening  lines  is  a  very 
interesting  allusion  to  the  Legend  of  Horus,  who  in  later 
days  was  identified  specially  as  the  Solar-god  of  the  town  of 
Behutet,  or  Edfu,  in  Upper  Egypt.  It  will  be  remembered 
that  in  very  early  times,  when  Horus  had  inflicted 
several  defeats  on  the  enemies  of  his  father  Ra,  large 
numbers  of  these  enemies  succeeded  in  escaping,  and,  by 
means  of  magic,  in  taking  the  forms  of  birds,  animals,  and 

X   2 


300  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

reptiles,  i.e.,  crocodiles,  etc.  Horus,  however,  penetrated 
their  disguises,  and  pursued  them  relentlessly,  and  slew 
them.  This  same  Horus  is  seen  in  the  Boat  of  Ra  in  the 
Vignette,  and  the  recital  of  this  Chapter  by  Ani  secured  for 
him  the  protection  of  the  god.  According  to  the  Rubric 
the  words  of  the  Chapter  were  to  be  said  over  a  plaque,  on 
which  were  painted  figures  of  Horus  and  the  gods  already 
mentioned,  and  a  figure  of  the  deceased,  seated  in  a  boat, 
or  over  a  model  of  the  Boat  of  Ra  in  which  figures  of  the 
gods  were  placed  ;  if  this  were  done  the  deceased  would  be 
able  to  travel  with  the  Sun-god  everywhere. 

Vignette  :  A  ladder. 

Text:  In  the  Papyrus  of  Ani  there  is  no  text  given 
with  the  Vignette  of  the  Ladder,  and  in  the  Theban 
Recension  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead  there  is  no  Chapter  of 
the  Ladder,  although  there  are  several  allusions  to  the 
Ladder.  Thus  in  Chapter  XCVHI,  the  deceased  Nu 
says :  "  The  god  Shu  hath  made  me  to  stand  up,  the  Light- 
"  god  hath  made  me  vigorous  by  the  two  sides  of  the 
"  Ladder,  and  the  imperishable  stars  make  me  to  advance 
"  and  lead  me  away  from  slaughter."  In  Chapter  CXLIX 
(Aat  XI)  he  says  :  "  I  rise  up  like  Ra.  I  am  strong  like  the 
"  Eye  of  Horus.  My  heart,  once  brought  low,  is  now 
"  made  strong.  I  am  a  spirit  in  heaven,  and  mighty  upon 
"  the  earth.  I  fly  like  a  hawk,  I  cackle  like  the  Smen  goose, 
"  and  I  alight  by  the  Lake  of  the  Thigh.  I  stand  up  and 
"  sit  down  by  it.  I  rise  up  like  a  god,  I  eat  food  in  the 
"  Field  of  Offerings,  I  advance  to  the  realm  of  the  Star- 
"  gods.  The  doors  of  Maat  are  opened  to  me,  and  the 
"  doors  of  the  sky  are  unbolted  before  me.  I  set  up  a 
**  Ladder  to  heaven  [to  ascend  to  the  gods],  and  I  am  a 
"  divine  being  among  them."  And  in  Chapter  CLIIIa 
(lines  34,  35)  it  says  :  "  The  Osiris  Nu,  whose  word  is  truth, 
"  appeareth  upon  the  Ladder  that  Ra  hath  made  for  him, 
"  and  Horus  and  Suti  hold  him  tighdy  by  the  arm  [as  he 
"  ascendeth  it]." 

The  belief  in  the  Ladder  as  a  means  of  reaching  heaven 
is  very  old,  and  a  tradition  existed  among  the  Egyptians 
which  stated  that  Osiris  himself  was  obliged  to  ascend  into 
heaven  by  a  Ladder.  Ra  stood  on  one  side  of  it  and 
Horus  on  the  other,  and  they  lifted  Osiris  up  the   Ladder 


The  Ladder  to  Heaven  301 

step  by  step.^  Among  the  texts  cut  on  the  walls  of  the 
Pyramid  of  Pepi  I  (1.  192  f.)  we  find  a  version  of  the 
Chapter  of  the  Ladder,  which  reads  :  "  Homage  to  thee, 
"  O  divine  Ladder  !  Homage  to  thee,  O  Ladder  of  Set ! 
"  Stand  thou  upright,  O  divine  Ladder.  Stand  thou 
"  upright,  O  Ladder  of  Set.  Stand  thou  upright,  O  Ladder 
"  of  Horus,  whereby  Osiris  appeared  in  heaven  when  he 

"  used  the  words  of  power  of  Ra Pepi  is  thy  son, 

"  Pepi  is  Horus.  Thou  hast  begotten  Pepi  even  as  thou 
"  hast  begotten  the  god  who  is  the  Lord  of  the  Ladder. 
"  Give  thou  unto  Pepi  the  Ladder  of  the  god  [Horus],  give 
"  thou  unto  him  the  Ladder  of  the  god  Set,  whereby  Pepi 
"  shall  appear  in  heaven,  when  he  hath  made  use  of  the 
"  words  of  power  of  Ra.  Hail,  thou  god  of  the  Kau 
"  (Doubles)  who  advance  when  the  Eye  of  Horus  soareth 
"  upon  the  wings  of  Thoth  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  Ladder 
"  of  the  god.  Hail,  ye  who  desire  that  your  bodies  shall 
"  go  into  heaven.  Pepi  is  the  Eye  of  Horus,  and  whenso- 
"  ever  the  Eye  of  Horus  directeth  itself  to  any  place  where 
"  he  is  Pepi  goeth  by  its  side.  Hail,  brethren  of  the  gods, 
"  rejoice  ye,  for  Pepi  journeyeth  among  you.  The  brethren 
"  of  the  gods  shall  be  glad  when  they  meet  Pepi,  even  as 
"  Horus  is  glad  when  he  meeteth  his  Eye,  which  he  placed 
"  before  his  father  Keb.  Every  god  and  every  Spirit-soul 
"  reach  out  their  hands  to  Pepi  when  he  appeareth  in 
"  heaven  from  the  Ladder.  Pepi  needeth  not  to  plough 
"  or  to  collect  offeringrs,  and  he  needeth  not  to  gro  to  the 
"  Hall  in  Anu  (Heliopolis),  or  to  the  Tuat  Chamber  in 
"  Anu  ;  for  that  which  he  seeth  and  that  which  he  heareth 
"  shall  feed  him  and  nourish  him  when  he  appeareth  in 
"  heaven  from  the  Ladder.  Pepi  standeth  up  like  the 
"  uraeus  on  the  forehead  of  Ra,  and  every  god  and  every 
"  goddess  stretch  out  the  hand  to  Pepi  on  the  Ladder. 
"  Pepi  hath  collected  his  bones,  and  gathered  together  his 
"  flesh,  and  he  hath  gone  speedily  into  heaven  by  means  of 
"  the  two  fino;ers  of  the  crod  of  the  Ladder." 

According  to  the  text  of  Pepi  H  (11.  975  ff.)  the  sides  of 
the  Ladder  were  cut  into  shape  by  an  adze  wielded  by 
the  god  Sashsa,  the  rungs  were  made  of  the  sinews  of 
Kasut,  the  Bull  of  the  Sky,  and  they  were  fastened  to  the 

^  Text  of  Unas,  I.  579. 


302  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

sides  of  the  Ladder  by  thongs  cut  from  the  hide  of  the  god 
Utes,  the  son  of  Hesat.  Elsewhere  we  read^  that  the 
Ladder  was  carried  by  Khensu,  Aahes,  Tetun,  and  Sept, 
who  set  up  the  Ladder  for  Pepi,  and  who  made  it  to  stand 
firmly.  The  gods  mentioned  in  the  last  extract  are  gods  of 
the  South,  or  Sudani  gods,  a  fact  which  suggests  that  the 
legend  of  the  Ladder  reaching  from  earth  to  heaven  is  of 
Sudani  origin.  When  Osiris  ascended  the  Ladder  "  he  was 
"  covered  with  the  covering  of  Horus,  he  wore  the  apparel 
"  of  Thoth,  Isis  went  before  him,  Nephthys  followed  behind 
"  him,  Upuatu  opened  out  the  way  (i.e.,  cleared  a  path)  for 
"  him,  Shu  bore  him  up,  the  Souls  of  Anu  drew  him  up 
"  the  steps,  one  by  one,  and  the  goddess  Nut  gave  him  her 
"hands"  (Pepi  I,  1.  256).  In  primitive  times  it  was 
customary  to  place  models  of  the  Ladder  of  Osiris  in  the 
tombs,  so  that  the  souls  of  the  dead  might  have  the  means 
whereby  they  could  ascend  to  heaven,  provided  that  they 
were  properly  equipped  with  an  adequate  knowledge  of  the 
name  of  the  Ladder,  and  of  the  words  of  power  that  were 
necessary  to  make  it  to  raise  itself  up  and  to  stand  firm. 
In  later  times,  when  the  custom  had  fallen  into  disuse,  the 
scribes  seem  to  have  painted  figures  of  the  Ladder  on 
coffins  and  papyri,  but  whether  with  or  without  the  text  of 
the  Chapter  of  the  Ladder  cannot  be  said.  The  Ladder  in 
the  Papyrus  of  Ani  is  a  very  interesting  proof  of  the  survival 
of  the  belief  in  the  efficacy  of  a  picture  of  the  Ladder  in 
the  Theban  Period. 

PLATE  XXIII 

Vignette  :  The  scribe  Ani,  arrayed  in  white  apparel, 
kneeling  upon  one  knee,  and  with  his  hand  raised  in 
adoration  of  the  gods  of  : — 

1.  Anu  (Heliopolis),  Temu,  Shu,  and  Tefnut. 

2.  Tetu  (Busiris),   Osiris,    Isis,    Nephthys,    and   Heru- 

netch-tef-f 

3.  Sekhem  (Letopolis),  Heru-khenti-en-ariti,  and  Thoth. 

4.  Pe-Tep    (Buto),    Horus,    Isis,    Kesta    (Mesta),   and 

Hapi. 

5.  Taiu-Rekhti,  Isis,  Horus,  and  Kesta  (Mesta). 

6.  Abtu  (Abydos),  Osiris,  Isis,  and  Upuatu. 

7.  The  Judgment  of  the  Dead,  Thoth. 

^  Pepi  I,  1.  200  =  Pepi  II,  1.  936. 


The  Gods  in  the  Train  of  Osiris  303 

PLATE  XXIV 

7.  The  Judgment  of  the   Dead — continued.      A   man- 

headed  god  and  a  jackal-headed  god. 

8.  The  ploughing  of  the  earth,  three  man-headed  gods. 

9.  Nerutef,  Ra,  Shu  and  Tefnut  (?),  and  Beba. 

10.   Rasta,  Horus,  Isis(?),  a  god  with  a  short  beard. 

The  above  are  the  gods  of  the  great  towns  of  Egypt 
which  are  enumerated  in  Chapter  XVIII,  arranged  in  a 
row  ;  they  have  already  been  given  in  groups  in  Plates  XIII 
and  XIV.  The  artist  has  omitted  some  of  the  gods  given 
in  the  earlier  copy  of  the  Chapter,  and  has  modified  the 
forms  of  some  so  much  that  they  cannot  be  identified.  The 
text  says  that  the  gods  of  Nerutef  are  Ra,  Osiris,  Shu,  and 
Beba,  but  the  artist  has  painted  figures  of  Ra,  Shu  with 
a  goddess,  and  Beba,  thus  omitting  Osiris,  and  inserting 
a  ofoddess  who  must  be  Tefnut. 

Text :  [Chapter  XVI 1 1.]  Without  title  in  the  Papyrus 
of  Ani.  The  Rubric  is  given  on  Plate  XXIV,  and  shows 
that  the  object  of  the  Chapter  was  to  make  the  deceased  to 
come  forth  by  day,  after  death,  whensoever  he  pleased.  It 
enabled  him  to  walk  about  on  earth,  to  make  his  escape 
from  any  fire  which  might  break  out  on  his  path,  and  to 
prevent  him  from  being  assailed  by  any  evil  circumstance 
incidental  to  his  condition  for  ever  and  for  ever. 

Vignette  :  The  scribe  Ani  and  his  wife  Tutu,  both 
arrayed  in  white  linen  apparel,  standing  before  three  gods, 
who  are  seated  on  a  mat,  which  is  spread  on  the  roof  of 
a  low  sepulchral  building.  The  other  papyri  of  the  period 
of  the  Papyrus  of  Ani  have  four  gods  in  their  Vignette  to 
this  Chapter  ;  sometimes  they  are  in  mummy  forms  with 
the  heads  of  men,  and  sometimes  they  have  the  character- 
istic heads  of  the  Four  Sons  of  Horus. 

Text :  [Chapter  CXXIV.]  The  Chapter  of  enter- 
ing   INTO     the     presence    OF    THE    TCHATCHAU     CHIEFS     OF 

Osiris.  In  this  Chapter  Ani  says  that  he  has  built  himself 
a  house  in  Tetu,  the  city  of  Osiris,  and  that  his  vassals  have 
ploughed  his  fields,  or  it  may  be  that  he  has  ploughed  the 
earth,  digging  into  it  the  blood  of  his  vassals  whom  he  has 
sacrificed  to  the  T^t,  a  god  who  was  worshipped  in  Tetu  in 
very  early  times,  before  the  great  growth  of  the  cult  of  Osiris 
that  took  place  there  under  the  rule  of  the  dynasties.     Ani 


304  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

next  refers  to  the  purity  of  the  food  which  he  has  eaten  ; 
filth  is  an  abomination  to  him,  and  he  will  not  eat  it,  or 
touch  it,  or  even  walk  upon  it.  His  food  is  the  food_  of  Ra, 
and  it  is  brought  to  him  by  the  Boats  of  Ra,  the  Antchet 
and  the  Sektet.  His  position  among  the  gods  is  a  very 
strong  one,  and  he  threatens  any  god  who  may  wish  to  attack 
him  that,  in  the  event  of  his  so  doing,  he  shall  be  judged 
by  the  "ancestors  of  the  years,"  or  the  gods  of  the  year, 
and  that  Osiris  shall  devour  him  when  he  comes  forth  from 
Abydos.  He  shall  also  be  judged  by  the  "  ancestors  of 
Ra,"  and  by  the  great  Spirit-soul,  or  Light-god.  Here 
clearly  we  have  an  allusion  to  the  ancient  gods  of  the  year 
who  were  worshipped  in  Egypt  before  Osiris  or  Ra  was 
known.  And  Ani  has  the  power  to  hold  converse  with  the 
disk  and  with  the  solar  gods.  He  sits  side  by  side  with 
Osiris,  who  speaks  to  him  in  the  language  of  the  gods,  and 
Ani  replies  in  the  speech  of  men.  Ani  absorbs  the  attributes 
of  all  the  gods  of  Anu,  Tetu,  Hensu,  Abtu,  Apu,  and  Senu, 
and  becomes  the  great  Sahu  of  heaven,  the  counterpart  ot 
Osiris,  and  the  overlord  of  every  god  and  goddess  in  Khert- 
Neter.  It  must  be  noted  that  the  gods  Kesta,  Hapi, 
Tuamutef,  and  Qebhsenuf,  who  presided  over  the  safety  of 
his  mummified  intestines,  also  became  his  judges,  a  fact  that 
suggests  the  existence  of  a  belief  that  the  testimony  of  the 
internal  organs  of  a  man  might  be  given  by  them  for  or 
against  him  in  the  Judgment  Hall  of  Osiris,  before  Osiris 
and  his  Forty-two  Assessors. 

PLATE  XXV 

With  this  Plate  begins  the  series  of  very  important 
Chapters  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead  that  are  known  as  the 
"  Chapters  of  making  the  Transformations."  The  object  of 
the  formulae  of  which  they  are  composed  was  to  enable  the 
deceased  to  take  any  form  he  pleased,  and  to  make  himself 
to  appear  in  any  guise  so  long  as  it  assisted  him  in  making 
his  way  through  Dead-land  into  the  Kingdom  of  Osiris. 

Vignette :  A  swallow  perched  on  a  conical  object 
painted  in  stripes,  red  and  green.  What  this  object  is 
cannot  be  said,  but  it  is  probably  meant  to  represent  the 
alighting  place  of  the  swallow  that  carried  the  news  of  the 
death  of  Horus  and  the  grief  of  I  sis  to  the  gods. 


Of  Becoming  a  Swallow  and  a  Hawk       305 

Text :  [Chapter  LXXXVL]  The  Chapter  of  making 
THE  transformation  INTO  THE  SWALLOW.  By  the  recital 
of  this  Chapter  Ani  transformed  himself  into  the  swallow, 
which  was  an  incarnation  of  Serqet,  the  Scorpion-goddess, 
the  daughter  of  Ra  and  of  I  sis.  The  swallow  was  a  harbinger 
of  glad  tidings,  and  was,  and  still  is,  welcomed  everywhere 
in  Egypt  and  the  Sudan.  The  glad  tidings  that  Ani 
proclaims  is  that  Horus  sits  on  the  throne  of  his  father 
Osiris,  and  that  he  is  the  Captain  of  the  Boat  of  Ra,  and 
that  Set  is  bound  fast,  and  is  a  helpless  prisoner  in  the 
fetters  which  Ani  had  prepared  for  him.  Ani  proclaims  his 
innocence  and  his  purity  of  soul  and  body,  and  claims  the 
right  to  enter  in  among  the  gods  because  he  is  holy,  as  they 
are  holy.  All  roads  are  known  to  him,  and  no  door  is 
closed  to  him,  and  as  the  swallow  flies  about  everywhere  in 
the  sunshine,  so  does  he  travel  about  over  Sekhet  Aaru. 
Since  I  sis  took  the  form  of  a  swallow,  and  raised  up  Osiris 
to  life,  Ani  on  taking  the  form  of  a  swallow  is  able  to 
restore  to  life  his  dead  body  that  is  lying  in  the  earth.  The 
soul  that  knew  not  this  Chapter  was  doomed  to  remain  in 
Dead-land. 

Vignette  :  A  golden  hawk,  holding  a  flail  or  whip  /\, 
standing  upon  the  symbol  of  gold  fw^. 

Text:  [Chapter  LXXVII.]  The  Chapter  of  making 

THE  TRANSFORMATION    INTO    A   HAWK    OF    GOLD.       The    recital 

of  this  Chapter  enabled  Ani  to  take  the  form  of  the  golden 
hawk,  with  pinions  that  were  four  cubits  from  tip  to  tip,  and 
plumage  in  colour  like  the  precious  natch  stone  that  is  found 
in  the  South.  The  object  of  taking  this  form  w^as  to  obtain 
the  means  of  flying  from  this  earth  up  into  the  sky,  and  so 
into  the  Antchet  and  Sektet  Boats  of  the  Sun-god.  In  the 
form  of  a  hawk  he  could  fly  up  among  the  gods  and  take 
his  seat  with  them,  and  he  could  visit  the  Field  of  Oflerings 
and  refresh  himself  on  celestial  food  at  will.  Once  there  he 
could  transform  himself  into  a  Spirit-soul,  and  live  with  the 
Spirit-souls  of  Osiris  and  Ra.  The  celestial  Grain-god 
Nepra  would  supply  him  with  food,  and  Ra  would  listen  to 
his  words  as  to  those  of  the  Benu  bird,  into  which  the  soul 
of  the  Sun-god  transformed  itself  The  early  Egyptians 
believed  that  the  souls  of  the  just  passed  from  earth  to 
heaven  on  the  wings  of  the  ibis  of  Thoth,  but  the  later 


3o6  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

Egyptians  preferred  to  travel  thither  by  taking  the  form  of 
the  hawk  of  gold. 

Vignette  :  A  green  hawk,  holding  a  whip,  and  standing 
upon  the  roof  of  the  sepulchral  building  called  sei'ekli. 

Text:  [Chapter  LXXVIII,  11.  1-16.]     The  Chapter 

OF     MAKING     THE     TRANSFORMATION      INTO     THE     GOD-HAWK. 

This  Chapter  is  at  once  the  longest  of  all  the  Chapters  of 
Transformations  and  the  most  important.  The  object  of 
the  recital  of  the  Chapter  was  not  only  to  enable  the 
deceased  to  take  the  form  of  any  hawk,  but  to  incorporate 
himself  in  that  very  hawk  in  which  Horus,  the  son  of  Osiris 
and  Isis,  who  was  begotten  by  Osiris  when  dead,  and  who 
was  conceived  and  brought  forth  by  Isis  from  his  father's 
seed,  appeared  on  earth.  Ani,  and  every  worshipper  of 
Osiris,  wished  to  become  soul  of  the  soul  of  Horus,  heart  of 
the  heart  of  Horus,  and  flesh  of  the  flesh  of  Horus.  The 
attainment  of  this  desire  made  Ani  to  be  the  son  of  Osiris 
and  Isis,  and  the  son  of  the  Sun-god  Ra,  his  being  was 
therefore  merged  in  that  of  the  "  Great  God,"  and  he 
became  almighty  and  everlasting,  and  the  recipient  of  the 
homage  which  "  the  gods  "  paid  to  their  Overlord.  He 
became  the  Great  Spirit-soul  wherein  all  Spirit-souls  lived, 
and  the  Great  Sahu,  or  Spirit-body,  wherein  all  Sahu  lived. 
With  this  exalted  and  divine  relationship  Ani  was  not  fain 
to  be  content.  The  Egyptians  imagined  a  time  very  far 
back  when  the  "  gods "  did  not  exist,  and  when  neither 
Osiris  nor  Ra  had  come  into  being.  There  was  no  heaven 
and  no  earth,  no  sun,  no  moon,  no  stars,  no  death,  and  no 
men  and  women  ;  and  what  existed  was  the  great  mass  of 
Celestial  Waters  wherein  dwelt  the  great,  almighty,  invisible, 
unknowable  God,  whom  the  Egyptians  called  Tem  or  Temu. 
At  some  period  unknown  to  gods  and  men  this  Tem  created 

PLATE  XXVI 
[Chapter   LXXVI  1 1 — continued?^ 

a   Spirit-soul  and  caused  it  to  live  in  a   creation   of  light 

w 


g\   m  v\Jj.      Now   this   Spirit-soul    proceeded 
from    the   "eye  of  the   Lord    One"  ""^zz^     1     jj,   and 

it  was  the  essence  of  Tem  and  his  very  being,  and  it  was 


Of  Becoming  a  Serpent  and  a  Crocodile     307 

the  source  from  which  sprang  the  Light-god,  whose  visible 
emblem  was  the  sun,  or  the  god  Ra.  With  this  primeval 
Spirit-soul,  the  emanation  of  God,  Ani  declares  his  identity, 
and  he  asserts  boldly  his  direct  descent  from  God,  adding  : 
"  When  as  yet  I  sis  had  not  given  birth  to  Horus,  I  had 
"  sprouted  and  flourished,  and  I  was  the  greatest  of  all  the 
"  Spirit-souls  who  had  come  into  being  with  the  Spirit- 
"  souls,  and  I  was  older  than  they."  Horus  [the  Elder] 
provided  this  primeval  Spirit-soul  with  a  Spirit  body, 
leaving  his  own  soul  inside  it,  and  in  later  times  it  dwelt  in 
Horus,  the  son  of  Isis,  and  reigned  jointly  with  Osiris  in  the 
Tuat.  Thus,  the  recital  of  this  Chapter  was  believed  to 
make  the  deceased  to  become  a  part  of  the  being  and 
substance  and  essence  of  God,  and  a  fellow-god  with  Osiris, 
Horus,  and  Ra,  and  the  equal  and  companion  of  the  kings 
of  Egypt  in  the  Tuat. 

PLATE  XXVII 
Vignette  :  The  serpent  Sata,  with  human  legs  and  feet. 
Text:    [Chapter    LXXXVII.]      The    Chapter    of 

MAKING      THE     TRANSFORMATION      INTO     THE     SERPENT     SaTA 

(i.e.,  the  Son  of  the  Earth).  The  recital  of  this  Chapter 
enabled  Ani  to  acquire  the  power  of  the  serpent  Sata  to 
cast  its  old  skin,  and  to  appear  in  a  new  one.  It  is 
impossible  to  identify  the  particular  serpent  typified  by  Sata, 
but  there  must  have  been  some  physical  characteristic  in 
the  creature  which  caused  it  to  be  associated  with  new  birth 
and  a  rejuvenated  body.  As  the  text  refers  to  the  number  of 
its  years  we  may  assume  that  Sata  was  one  of  the  longest- 
lived  serpents. 

Vignette :    A  huge  crocodile  lying  upon   a  pylon  or 
doorway. 

Text:    [Chapter    LXXXVHL]      The   Chapter  of 

MAKING    THE    TRANSFORMATION    INTO    A    CROCODILE.       In    this 

Chapter  Ani  identifies  himself  with  the  Lord  who  was 
worshipped  in  Sekhem,  a  town  in  the  Letopolite  nome  of 
Lower  Egypt,  and  with  the  Great  Fish,  who  lived  in  Kamur, 
a  town  in  the  Athribite  nome  in  Lower  Egypt,  thus 
acquiring  the  power  of  striking  terror  that  has  always  been 
associated  with  the  crocodile.  The  object  of  his  taking 
the  form  of  the   crocodile  was  to  enable  him   to  traverse 


3o8  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

the  Nile,  or  any  stream,  without  danger  to  himself.  The 
crocodile  has  always  been  w^orshipped  in  Egypt  and  the 
Sudan,  and  as  late  as  the  reign  of  Muhammad  'Ali  a  sacred 
crocodile  was  kept  in  a  tank  at  Khartum  and  venerated  by 
the  people  there.  On  the  Blue  Nile  until  quite  recently  the 
natives  believed  that  by  means  of  magic  men  could  be 
transformed  into  crocodiles,  and  so  have  the  power  of 
crossing  the  Nile  at  will.  At  the  present  day  the  genitals 
of  the  crocodile  find  ready  purchasers,  who  cut  them  up 
into  small  pieces  and  sell  them  as  an  aphrodisiac.  In  very 
early  times  the  crocodile  was  considered  to  be  a  form  of  the 
Sun-god. 

Vignette  :  The  god  Ptah  standing  in  a  shrine.  He  is 
in  mummy  form,  and  holds  a  sceptre  in  his  hands,  and 
stands  upon  the  cubit  of  Maat  ;  from  his  neck  hangs  the 
viendt,  symbolic  of  virility  and  sexual  pleasure.  Before  the 
shrine  is  a  stand  with  offerings  upon  it. 

Text:  [Chapter  LXXXII.]    The  Chapter  of  making 

THE  TRANSFORMATION    INTO   THE   GOD    PtAII.       This  god  WaS 

originally  a  master  blacksmith,  but  divine  honours  were 
paid  to  him  after  his  death,  and  eventually  he  was  regarded 
as  one  of  the  great  cosmic  gods,  who  executed  the  com- 
mands of  Thoth  when  he  decreed  the  making  of  the 
heavens  and  the  earth.  The  recital  of  this  Chapter  secured 
for  Ani  the  strength  of  Ptah  and  an  abundance  of  offerings, 
and  enabled  him  to  identifiy  himself  with  Temu  and  Ra. 
He  became  thereby  the  Bull  of  the  Gods  of  Anu,  his  strength 
increased  moment  by  moment,  and  his  loins  were  made 
strong  to  endure  for  millions  of  years. 

Vignette  :  A  Ram,  symbolic  of  the  Soul-god  of  Tetu, 
i.e.,  Busiris. 

Text :     [Chapter     LXXXV.]       The     Chapter     of 

MAKING     THE     TRANSFORMATION     INTO     THE    SOUL    OF    TeMU. 

This  Chapter  formed  a  most  powerful  spell,  the  object  of 
which  was  to  transform  Ani  into  the  Soul-god  of  Nu,  or 
the  heavens  ;  its  contents  resemble  those  of  a  part  of  the 
LXXVHIth  Chapter.  The  Soul-god  who  was  symbolized 
by  a  ram  was  the  counterpart  of  the  primeval  Soul  which 
Temu,  the  Father  of  all  the  Gods,  placed  in  Ra  the  Sun- 
god,    and    which    came    into    being    under    the    name    of 


Of  Becoming  Ptah  and  Temu  309 

"  Khepera."  Since  Ani  abominates  sin  and  lives  in  Truth, 
he  has  the  power  to  take  the  form  of  the  Great  Soul  and  to 
become  an  emanation  of  the  Light-god. 

Vignette  :  A  Benu  bird. 

Text:    [Chapter    LXXXIII.]       The    Chapter    of 

MAKING    THE    TRANSFORMATION    INTO   THE    BeNU    BIRD.       The 

Benu  bird,  which  was  at  a  later  period  identified  with  the 
phoenix,  was  supposed  to  be  self-produced,  and  was  there- 
fore a  type  of  the  god  Khepera,  a  god  who  was  self-produced 
and  self-begotten.  By  the  recital  of  this  Chapter  Ani  was 
able  to  declare  that  the  germs  of  every  god  were  in  him, 
and  that  he  was  Yesterday,  i.e.,  Osiris,  and  that  he  was 
Khensu,  the  Moon-god,  who  was  irresistible.     The  allusion 

to  the  Tortoise  is  not  quite  clear,  but  1^^^^  l|  '  L=/]  %^  ^ 
\^  ^k^  •^^  seems  to  mean  that  Ani  is  clothed  with  a 

garment  which  is  as  durable  as  is  the  shell  of  the  Tortoise, 
or  Turtle.  The  Rubric,  which  is  found  in  some  papyri, 
informs  us  that  a  knowledge  of  this  Chapter  will  provide 
the  deceased  with  the  food  which  Osiris  eats,  will  enable 
him  to  take  any  form  he  pleases,  to  travel  over  the  earth 
with  Ra,  to  see  this  god  daily,  and  to  be  free  from  the 
influence  of  every  evil  thing  for  ever. 

PLATE  XXVIII 
Vignette :  A  heron. 
Text:    [Chapter    LXXXIV.]      The     Chapter     of 

MAKING     the     TRANSFORMATION     INTO    A    HERON.       Owing  tO 

our  lack  of  knowledge  of  the  views  that  the  Egyptians  held 
concerning  the  bird  figured  in  the  Vignette,  it  is  impossible 
to  say  exactly  what  the  recital  of  this  Chapter  was  supposed 
to  effect,  and  what  benefit  would  accrue  to  Ani  from  takincr 
the  form  of  a  heron.  The  text  suggests  that  it  would  pive 
him  power  over  the  animals  that  were  brought  for  sacrifice, 
in  other  words,  that  he  would  be  able  to  supply  himself 
with  food.  It  also  asserts  that  Ani  has  rendered  service  to 
the  dweller  in  Hermopolis,  i.e.,  Thoth,  that  he  has  set  the 
gods  in  their  places,  that  he  knows  Nut,  the  Sky-goddess, 
and  Tatun,  a  very  ancient  Earth-god,  and  the  "  Red 
Goddess  "  (Teshertt),  and   Heka,  the  great  god  of  spells 


3IO  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

and  incantations.  As  Ani  proclaims  his  truthfulness,  and 
his  daily  progress  towards  Truth,  it  is  clear  that  he  could 
never  hope  to  take  the  form  of  the  heron  unless  he  was 
sinless  in  word  and  in  deed.  The  concluding  lines  of  this 
Chapter  as  found  in  the  Papyrus  of  Ani  did  not  really 
belong  to  it,  for  they  form  the  last  part  of  Chapter  LXXXVI, 
which  the  scribe  appears  to  have  copied  here  because  there 
was  no  room  for  it  in  its  proper  place. 

Vignette  :  A  human  head  springing  from  a  lotus  flower 
growing  in  a  pool  of  water  MM. 

Text:     [Chapter     LXXXIa.]      The    Chapter     of 

MAKING      THE      TRANSFORMATION      INTO      A      LOTUS       FLOWER. 

The  lotus,  or  lily,  was  believed  to  be  the  favourite  flower 
of  Ra,  and  to  be  the  product  of  an  emanation  of  that  god. 
The  flower  here  referred  to  is,  however,  the  celestial  lotus, 
from  the  calyx  of  which  the  rising  sun,  or  Harpokrates,  rose 
day  by  day.  Thus  the  idea  of  resurrection  was  associated 
with  the  lotus,  and  when  Ani  wished  to  have  the  power  to 
transform  himself  into  the  lotus,  it  was  in  order  that  he 
might  be  able  to  give  new  birth  to  his  body,  and  to  emerge 
into  heaven  daily  like  the  Sun-god.  In  the  second  version 
of  this  Chapter  the  lotus  is  said  to  be  the  symbol  of  Nefer- 
Tem,  i.e.,  Young  Tem,  who  was  the  son  of  Ptah  and 
the  goddess  Sekhmet.  Chapter  LXXXII  gave  Ani  the 
power  to  transform  himself  into  Ptah,  one  of  the  great 
creator-gods,  and  the  knowledge  of  Chapter  LXXXI 
enabled  him  to  become  the  son  of  Ptah.  The  first  version 
of  this  Chapter  helped  him  to  take  the  form  of  Horus,  but 
Horus  and  Nefer-Tem  were  only  juvenile  forms  of  one  and 
the  same  god,  i.e.,  the  rising  sun.  In  the  older  form  of  the 
Vignette  as  given  in  the  Papyrus  of  Nebseni,  we  have 
a  lotus  in  full  flower,  but  no  human  head,  and  the  text 
proves  that  the  lotus  was  growing  in  the  "  field  of  Ra,"  and 
not  in  a  lake  or  pool  of  water.  In  many  papyri  the 
Vignette  is  the  same  in  both  versions. 

Vignette  :  A  seated,  bearded  god,  with  the  solar  disk 
on  his  head. 

Text :  [Chapter  LXXX.]    The  Chapter  of  making 

THE     transformation     INTO     THE     GOD    WHO     GIVETH     LIGHT 

IN    THE    DARKNESS.     The    Land   of  the    Dead    contained 


Of  Escaping  the  Second  Death  311 

many  dark  places  through  which  Ani  would  have  to  travel 
before  he  emerged  into  the  light  of  the  Kingdom  of  Osiris, 
and  many  souls  were  lost  therein,  and  fell  a  prey  to  the 
fiends  of  darkness  who  lay  in  wait  there  for  the  worshippers 
of  Osiris.  To  avoid  this  possibility  Ani  found  it  necessary 
to  take  the  form  of  the  god  who  produced  light  from  his 
own  person,  for  by  this  means  he  would  be  able  to  lighten 
the  dark  places,  and  to  travel  through  them  in  safety.  The 
words  of  this  Chapter  enabled  him  to  identify  himself  with 
"the  orirdle  of  Nu,"  from  which  came  the  liofht  which 
lightened  heaven.  He  became  the  personification  of  Horus, 
the  god  of  Light,  and  of  Set,  the  god  of  Darkness,  and 
could  therefore  emit  light  or  remain  in  darkness  at  pleasure  ; 
in  other  words,  he  was  master  of  the  darkness.  He  had 
the  power  to  establish  the  light  of  the  moon  on  the  day  of 
the  full  moon,  to  hold  Set  in  equilibrium,  i.e.,  not  to  allow 
him  to  filch  away  any  part  of  the  uic/iai,  or  Eye  of  the 
Moon,  and  to  equip  Thoth  in  his  struggle  with  Set,  when 
he  should  pursue  Set,  and  make  him  to  restore  the  Eye, 
which  he  stole  month  by  month  and  swallowed.  The 
recital  of  this  Chapter  enabled  Ani  to  merge  himself  in  the 
substance  of  the  Moon-god,  i.e.,  Osiris,  just  as  the  recital 
of  Chapter  LXVIH  enabled  him  to  merge  his  body  and 
dual-soul  into  those  of  Temu,  the  primeval  god,  the  creator 
of  the  universe,  and  Father  of  the  Gods. 

PLATE  XXIX 

Vignette  :  The  scribe  Ani  and  his  wife  Tutu  standing 
with  their  hands  raised  in  adoration  before  the  god  Thoth, 
who  in   the  form  of  an  ibis-headed   man   is  seated    upon 

a   sepulchral   building,    holding    the    symbol    of   "life"    ■¥• 

upon  his  knees. 

Text :  [Chapter  CLXXV.]  The  Chapter  of  not 
DYING  A  second  TIME.  This  Chapter  is  of  very  great 
interest,  but  is  full  of  difficulties,  chiefly  because  the  text  is 
incomplete  at  the  end  ;  there  is  a  second  copy  of  it  in 
a  Leyden  papyrus,  but  it  is  very  much  mutilated.  According 
to  the  text  of  Ani  the  deceased  is  troubled  by  the  actions 
of  the  Children  of  Nut,  who  have  brought  confusion  into 
everything.  Not  being  able  to  understand  this  disorder  he 
applies   to   Thoth   for  an  explanation  of  it,  believing  that 


312  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

this  god,  as  the  secretary  of  Osiris,  will  know  all  his  master's 
secrets.  There  is,  however,  no  explanation  forthcoming. 
Next  Ani  finds  himself  in  a  place  of  unfathomable  depth, 
darker  than  the  darkest  night,  and  where  there  is  neither 
water  nor  air.  Why  he  is  there  or  where  the  place  is  is 
not  clear.  After  this  we  have  allusions  to  Horus,  and  the 
dweller  in  the  Lake  of  Fire,  and  the  Boat  of  Millions  of 
Years,  etc.,  but  it  is  impossible  to  fit  them  together  in  a 
connected  fashion  with  the  prayers  of  Ani,  who  is  supposed 
to  be  in  doubt  about  the  continuity  of  his  existence  in  the 
Other  World.  Again  he  applies  to  Thoth,  and  asks  him 
how  long  he  has  to  live.  Thoth's  answer  is  both  definite 
and  satisfactory,  for  he  replies  :  "  Thou  shalt  live  for  millions 
of  years,  a  life  of  millions  of  years."  The  rest  of  the 
Chapter  refers  to  the  succession  of  Horus  to  the  throne  of 
Osiris,  the  departure  of  Set,  the  felicity  of  Ani  in  the  Other 
World,  the  destruction  of  his  foes,  etc.  According  to 
M.  Naville,  who  bases  his  views  upon  a  minute  study  of 
the  Chapter  as  found  in  the  Leyden  papyrus,  this  composi- 
tion contains  the  remains  of  a  Herakleopolitan  legend  of 
the  Flood.  Tem  is  supposed  to  tell  Ani  that  he  is  about 
to  destroy  everything  that  he  has  made  by  the  Flood  which 
he  will  bring  upon  the  earth.  Everything  shall  be  destroyed 
except  himself  (Tem)  and  Osiris,  and  a  very  small  serpent 
which  no  gfod  shall  be  able  to  see.  After  the  Flood  Osiris 
shall  establish  his  kingdom  in  the  Island  of  Fire,  and  after 
his  departure  his  son  Horus  shall  sit  upon  his  throne.  If 
this  view  be  correct  this  Chapter  throws  considerable  light 
upon  the  mental  attitude  of  Ani,  who  ventured  to  suggest 
by  it  that  Thoth  would  regard  him  with  such  favour  and 
confidence,  that  he,  the  god  who  was  the  personification  of 
the  mind  of  God,  would  reveal  to  him  the  purpose  of  the 
Creator,  and  make  known  to  him  his  design  to  destroy  man 
and  beast  by  a  Flood.  It  is  interesting  also  to  note  that  Aiii 
could  imagine  Thoth  promising  to  him  a  life  of  "  millions 
of  years,"  and  believe  that  he  alone  among  men  would 
survive  the  death  and  destruction  that  the  Flood  would 
bring  upon  the  earth. 

PLATES  XXIX  AND  XXX 

Vignettes  :  I.   The  scribe  Ani,  arrayed  in  white  linen 
apparel,  standing  with  both  hands  raised  in  adoration  of  the 


Of  Kntering  the  Hall  of  Judgment  313 

god  Osiris.  In  front  of  him  are  altar  stands  and  tables 
loaded  with  offerings  of  every  kind,  which  he  is  presenting 
to  Osiris  ;  behind  him  stands  his  wife  Tutu,  holding  a 
sistrum,  a  niendt,  and  flowers  in  her  hands. 

2.  The  god  Osiris,  bearded  and  wearing  the  White 
Crown,  standing  inside  a  funerary  chest  or  coffer,  the 
roof  of  which  is  surmounted  by  a  head  of  the  hawk  that 
represents  Seker,  the  god  of  Death,  and  uraei.  This  chest 
is  symbolic  of  the  kingdom  of  Seker.  Osiris  is  in  mummy 
form,  and  his  body  is  decorated  with  a  sort  of  scale-work 
design,  which  was  probably  painted  on  his  swathings  in 
colours.      From  the  back  of  his  neck  hangs  a  7nendt,  and  he 

holds    two    sceptres    and    a    whip     j    1    /\  in    his    hands, 

which  emerge  from  his  swathings,  and  he  stands  upon  the 
cubit  of  viadt  ^==i.  The  face  and  hands  and  wrists  of 
Osiris  are  painted  green  to  indicate  that  Osiris  is  old. 
Out  of  the  point  of  the  cubit  grows  a  lotus  flower  in  full 
bloom,  on  which  stand  figures  of  the  Four  Sons  of  Horus, 
viz.,  Kesta  (Mesta),  Hapi,  Tuamutef,  and  Qebhsenuf. 
Behind  Osiris  stands  I  sis,  whose  right  arm  is  embracing 
him  ;  she  wears  J,  the  hieroglyph  for  her  name,  upon  her 

head,  and  carries  in  her  left  hand  the  symbol  of  "  life  "  ■¥■• 

The  chest  in  which  the  two  gods  stand  rests  upon,  or  is  a 
continuation  of  the  sepulchral,  pylon-shaped  building,  which 
represents  the  tomb  of  Osiris. 

Text :  [Chapter  CXXV.  Introduction,  or  Part  I.] 
The  Chapter  of  entering  into  the  Hall  of  Maatl 
This  Chapter  is  one  of  the  most  interesting  and  remarkable 
in  the  Book  of  the  Dead,  and  it  well  illustrates  the  lofty 
moral  and  spiritual  conceptions  of  the  Egyptians  under  the 
XVIIIth  dynasty.  The  ideas  that  it  embodies  are  as  old 
as  dynastic  civilization,  but  the  form  in  which  they  are  here 
presented  is  probably  not  older  than  the  Xlth  dynasty. 
The  deceased  is  supposed  to  be  standing  before  the  doors 
of  the  Hall  of  Judgment,  which  are  guarded  by  Anubis,  and 
to  him  he  describes  the  various  acts  of  piety  which  he  has 
performed,  his  object  being  to  see  the  great  gods  and  to 
feed  with  them  on  their  celestial  food.  He  has  visited 
Tetu  (Busiris)  and  Abtu  (Abydos),  and  has  taken  part  in 
the  ceremonies  performed  there,  and  he  has  seen  the  gods 
of  Kamur  and  Nerutef     Anubis  is  satisfied  that  Ani  knows 

VOL.   I.  Y 


314  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

the  towns  and  the  roads  in  Khert-Neter,  and  the  smell  of  him 
is  to  Anubis  as  that  of  one  of  the  gods.  Before  he  permits 
Ani  to  enter  into  the  Hall  of  Judgment  he  must  be  certain 
that  Ani  knows  the  magical  names  of  these  doors,  and  he 
questions  him  on  the  subject.  When  Ani  has  told  their 
names  Anubis  says  :  "  Pass  on,  for  thou  knowest  [the 
names]."  The  Introduction  (Part  I  of  this  Chapter  in 
the  Papyrus  of  Ani)  is  quite  different  from  that  found  in  the 
other  papyri  of  the  period,  and  is  far  more  suitable  to 
Parts  II  and  III  than  the  usual  Introduction.  In  the 
Papyrus  of  Nebseni  and  the  Papyrus  of  Nu  the  deceased 
states  that  he  knows  the  name  of  Osiris,  and  the  names  of 
the  Forty-two  Judges  who  sit  with  him  in  judgment,  and  he 
then  goes  on  to  enumerate  the  sins  and  moral  offences  which 
he  has  not  committed  :  in  short,  he  declares  that  he  has  not 
sinned  against  God  or  man.  In  Part  II,  which  is  commonly 
known  as  the  Negative  Confession,  the  deceased  addresses 
each  of  the  Forty-two  gods  by  name,  and  then  makes  to 
him  a  categorical  denial  that  he  has  committed  such  and 
such  a  sin.  Thus  in  the  papyri  generally  the  subject  matter 
of  Parts  I  and  II  is  the  same,  only  in  Part  II  the  deceased 
states  the  names  of  the  Forty-two  gods  of  whom  in  Part  I 
he  professes  to  know  the  names. 

PLATES  XXXI  AND  XXXII 

Vignette  :  The  Hall  of  Maati,  or  the  Judgment  Hall 
of  Osiris,  in  which  Ani  has  to  address  severally  the  Forty- 
two  gods  who  are  seated  in  a  row  down  the  centre  of  the 

Hall.     At  each  end  is  a  door  i  :  that  on  the  right  is  called 


Neb-maat-heri-tep-retui-f 


^^ 


j<^=^,    and 
w      I    ^^ 

that  on   the   left   Neb-pehti-thes-inenment  'V37    ^  ^^ 

A^AAAA  'tea  I ,     Over   the   centre  of  the  roof,  which  is 

crowned  with  a  series  of  feathers  of  7nadt  and  uraei  arranged 
alternately,  is  a  seated  deity  with  arms  and  hands  extended, 
the  right  over  the  Eye  of  Horus  ^,  and  the  left  over 
a  pool  of  water  fnTTTTTl .  He  is  painted  blue,  and  symbolizes 
the  primeval  Water-god,  who  was  the  creator  of  the  heavens 
and  the  earth.  He  is  discussed  fully  in  connection  with  a 
similar  Vignette  that  is  found  above  apart  of  Chapter  XVII 


The  Weighing  of  the  Heart  315 

(see  page  260).  On  the  right,  at  the  end  of  the  Hall  (see 
Plate  XXXII),  are  four  small  Vignettes,  in  which  are 
depicted  : 

1.  The  two  Maati  goddesses,  or  two  goddesses  of 
Truth,  who  probably  represent  I  sis  and  Nephthys.  Each 
wears  a  heavy  headdress,  tied  round  with  a  ribbon,  and 
above  it  is  an  ostrich  feather,  the  phonetic  value  of  which  is 
the  name  of  the  goddess — Maat.  Round  her  neck  is  a  collar, 
and  she  wears  a  long  light  tunic  reaching  to  her  ankles. 
On  each  wrist  is  a  bracelet,  and  she  holds  a  sceptre  in  her 
right  hand  and  the  symbol  of  "  life  "  in  her  left. 

2.  The  Osiris  Ani,  standing  with  both  hands  raised  in 
adoration  before  Osiris,  who  is  seated  on  a  throne  or  chair 
of  state  ;  he  is  in  mummy  form,  is  painted  white,  and  wears 
the  Atef  Crown  and  a  collar.  In  his  hands  he  holds  the 
usual  sceptre  and  whip.  Before  the  god  is  an  altar-stand 
with  a  libation  jar  and  lotus  upon  it. 

3.  The    heart   of   Ani   being  weighed   in   the    Balance 

against   the    symbol    of    Truth  fj.    Anubis    examines    the 

pointer,  and  Am-mit,  the  Devourer  of  the  dead,  is  seated 
by  the  side  of  the  Balance  ready  to  eat  up  the  heart  if  it 
should  happen  to  be  "  light  In  the  scales." 

4.  The  god  Thoth,  ibis-headed,  seated  on  a  sepulchral 
building,  and  engaged  in  painting  the  feather  symbolic  of 
Truth.     The  exact  significance  of  this  Vignette  is  not  clear. 

The  Forty-two  gods  have  different  faces  and  heads  : 
Nos.  1-5,  7,  8,  10,  II,  13-20,  22-25,  27-34,  36,  zi^  41 
and  42,  have  the  heads  of  men.  No.  6  has  the  head  of 
a  lion.  No.  9  the  head  of  a  crocodile.  No.  12  has  a  human 
head  turned  behind  him,  Nos.  21,  38-40  have  snakes'  heads, 
No.  26  has  a  hawk's  head,  and  No.  35  has  the  head  of 
a  hippopotamus.      In  the  Papyrus  of  Nebseni  each  of  the 

Forty-two  gods  is  in  the  form  of  a  mummy  and  has  f) 
upon  his  head.  In  the  Papyrus  of  Anhai  the  gods  have 
the  forms  of  men,  but  many  have  heads  of  animals,  four 

have  serpent  forms,  and  one  has  the  form  of  a  child    %. 

Very  few  of  the  names  of  these  gods  are  found  in  the 
ordinary  lists  of  gods,  and  as  a  rule  the  name  of  each 
describes  his  function  or  occupation,  or  some  personal 
characteristic.     Thus  we  have  :  Usekh-nemmat  "  He  of  the 

Y  2 


3i6  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

long  stride  "  ;  Fenti,  "He  of  the  nose  "  ;  Unem-khaibitu, 
"  Eater  of  shadows  "  ;  Neha-hau,  "  Stinking  body"  ;  Set- 
qesu,  "Bone-crusher";  Hetch-abehu,  "He  of  the  white 
teeth";  Unem-snef,  "Eater  of  blood";  Herfhaf,  "He 
whose  face  is  turned  behind  him  "  ;  etc. 

Text:  [Chapter  CXXV.  The  Negative  Confes- 
sion, OR  Part  II.]  This  composition  contains  a  series  of 
forty-two  addresses  to  the  Judges  or  Assessors,  who  sit 
with  Osiris  in  the  Hall  of  Maati.  Ani  addresses  each  g-od 
by  his  name,  and  mentions  the  name  of  the  place  where  his 
shrine  is,  and  says,  "  I  have  not  committed  "  such  and  such 
a  sin,  e.g.,  "  Hail,  Crusher  of  bones,  who  comest  forth  from 
Hensu,  I  have  not  uttered  falsehood." 

[The  Vignette  and  Text  of  Part  1 1 1  of  Chapter  CXXV 
and  the  Rubric  are  wanting  in  the  Papyrus  of  Ani. 
A  translation  of  the  "  Address  which  the  righteous  heart 
maketh  "  to  the  gods  in  the  Hall  of  Maati,  and  of  the 
Rubric  made  from  the  Papyrus  of  Nu  will  be  found  in  the 
Appendix  to  Chapter  CXXV.] 

PLATE  :^y^\\— {continued) 

Vignettes  :  I.   A  bearded  man-god,  Nu. 

,,  2.    Ra,   hawk-headed,  with  the  solar  disk 

on  his  head. 

3.  Hathor,  in  the  form  of  a  woman,  with 
disk  and  horns  on  her  head. 

4.  The  Wolf-god,  Up-uatu,  on  a  standard. 

5.  The  Jackal-god,  Anpu,  seated. 

6.  A  scorpion  gigp  holding  shen  Q  and  ■^. 

7.  The  goddess  I  sis,  woman-headed. 


»> 


„  8.   The  Ram-god,  Ba-neb-Tet. 

„  9.  The  goddess  Uatchit,  serpent-headed. 


»» 


)) 


»> 


» 


10.  The   goddess   Mert,   with  a  cluster  of 

plants  on  her  head  ^,  standing  upon 
the  symbol  of  gold  piisr^. 

11.  The  goddess   Neith,   in  the  form  of  a 

woman,  with  a  vase  on  her  head. 

12.  The  god  Set,  in  the  form  of  a  bearded 

man. 

13.  A  god  in  the  form  of  a  bearded  man. 


I,  14.  A  god  in  the  form  of  a  bearded  man. 


Of  Escaping  Slaughter  317 

Vignettes :  15.  The  goddess  Sekhmet,  In  the  form  of 
a  woman  having  the  head  of  a  lioness 
with  the  solar  disk  on  her  head. 

„  16.   An  utchat,  or  Eye  of  Horus,  resting  on 

a  sepulchral  building, 

„  17.   The  Man-god  Osiris,  seated,  and  wear- 

ing the  Atef  (ZroyNVi. 

„  18.   The   goddess   Nut,    in  the  form   of  a 

woman,  with  a  vase  on  her  head. 

„  19.   A  bearded  god  in  mummy  form,  with 

a  mendt  at   the    back    of  his    neck, 

holding  a  sceptre  |  and  standing  on 

madL 
„  20.  A  five-rayed   star,  symbolic  of  Sahu, 

or  Orion. 
,,  21.   Three  "  living  uraei." 

The  forms  of  the  Vignette  of  this  Chapter  vary  in  the 
other  papyri.  Thus  in  the  Papyrus  of  Nefer-uben-f  the 
deceased  is  seen  touching  his  mouth  with  the  tip  of  a  finger 
of  his  left  hand  ;  in  the  Papyrus  of  Sutimes  the  deceased  is 
lassoing  the  top  of  a  tet  pillar  (?)  ;  and  in  a  papyrus  in  the 
British  Museum  (No.  9950),  he  is  adjuring  a  serpent,  which 
seems  to  be  taking  to  flight.  In  the  Papyrus  of  Amen- 
hetep  in  Cairo  the  Vignette  contains  the  figures  of  eighteen 
orods. 

o 

Text:  [Chapter  XLII.     The  Chapter  of  repulsing 

THE      SLAUGHTERING      KNIVES      IN      HeNSU.         This      title      IS 

wanting  in  the  Papyrus  of  Ani.]  The  object  of  this  Chapter 
was  to  enable  the  deceased  to  escape  from  the  slaughter 
that  took  place  in  Hensu,  and  presumably  from  decapitation 
and  dismemberment.  It  seems  as  though  the  deceased 
feared  that  he  might  be  mistaken  for  an  enemy  of  Osiris 
and  be  slain  accidentally.  The  only  way  to  avoid  this  was 
to  place  each  member  of  the  body  under  the  protection  of 
a  god  or  goddess,  and  to  identify  it  with  him  or  her.  In 
the  Pyramid  Text  of  Pepi  I  the  composition  that  in  later 
times  became  Chapter  XLII  was  metrical  in  character,  and 
seems  to  have  been  chanted  or  sunsj  with  a  sort  of  refrain 
(see  the  Appendix  to  the  Chapter).  In  the  Theban 
Recension  the  refrain  has  been  dropped,  and  the  various 
lines  relating  to  the  deification  of  the  members  have  been 


3i8  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

grouped  together,  and  form  a  middle  section  in  the  Chapter. 
In  the  Papyrus  of  Ani,  and  in  the  later  papyri  down  to 
the  Ptolemaic  and  Roman  Periods,  this  section  is  arranged 
in  tabular  form,  and  illustrated  with  Vignettes.  It  was 
very  highly  prized  by  the  followers  of  Osiris  in  all  periods, 
for  it  was  believed  to  make  the  deceased  "  a  god,  and  the 
son  of  a  god,"  and  to  cause  him  to  merge  his  being  in  the 
"  Only  One,  who  proceedeth  from  an  Only  One."  The 
concluding  portion  of  the  Chapter  as  found  in  the  Pyramid 
Texts  is  totally  different  from  that  of  Chapter  XLII  in  the 
Theban  Recension. 

PLATE  XXXIII 
Vignette  :  A  Lake  of  Fire  or  of  boiling  water,  from 
the  four  sides  of  which  fire  or  boiling  steam  [ ]\   rises.     At 
each  corner  a  dog-headed  ape  is  seated. 

Text :  A  Rubric  which,  after  referring  to  the  state  of 
physical  comfort  in  which  Ani  shall  live  in  the  Other  World, 
and  to  the  abundant  supply  of  offerings  that  shall  be  made 
to  him,  goes  on  to  order  that  a  picture  of  a  table  of  offerings 
be  drawn  upon  a  clean  plaque,  which  shall  be  buried  in  a 
field  whereon  no  swine  have  trodden.  If  in  addition  to  this 
picture  the  text  be  written  upon  the  plaque,  his  children's 
children  shall  flourish  upon  earth,  and  he  himself  shall  live 
with  the  Followers  of  Osiris  and  with  the  Kings  of  Egypt, 
and  he  shall  sit  at  meat  with  the  grods. 

In  the  Papyrus  of  Nebseni  we  find  the  Vignette  placed 
among  the  text  of  the  Third  Part  of  Chapter  CXXV,  of 
which  it  seems  to  be  an  integral  part  ;  on  the  other  hand, 
there  is  no  reference  to  a  lake  of  fire  in  the  text,  nor  to  the 
Four  Holy  Apes.  As  regards  the  Rubric  it  is  found  at 
the  end  of  Chapter  CXXV  (see  Naville,  op.  cit.,  Bd.  I, 
Bl.  139),  and  it  is  then  clearly  to  be  considered  a  part  of 
Chapter  CXXV.  Thus  there  seems  to  be  good  reason 
for  assuming  that  both  the  Vignette  and  the  Rubric  in  the 
Papyrus  of  Ani  belong  to  Chapter  CXXV,  although  the 
Chapter  of  the  Deification  (or  Assimilation)  of  members  is 
inserted  between  them  and  the  Negative  Confession.  Some 
scribes,  however,  place  the  Vignette  with  a  different  text,  and 
treat  them  as  a  separate  Chapter,  namely,  Chapter  CXXVI. 
This    is    the    case    in    a   papyrus   in   the    British    Museum 


The  Tet  Amulet  319 

(No.  99i3  =  Naville  A^)  where  we  have  the  Address  to  the 
Four  Holy  Apes  written  in  the  upper  part  of  the  papyrus, 
and  the  Vignette  with  figures  of  the  Four  Apes  and  the 
Eight  Uraei  in  the  lower.  In  the  Turin  Papyrus  the 
Vignette  stands  above  the  text  of  Chapter  CXXVI  (Address 
to  the  Apes),  and  a  figure  of  the  deceased  is  seen  praying 
to  the  Apes.  If  we  regard  these  instances  as  conclusive 
we  must  assign  the  Rubric  in  the  Papyrus  of  Ani  to 
Chapter  CXXV,  and  assume  that  the  Vignette  is  really 
that  of  Chapter  CXXVI,  and  that  the  scribe  has  omitted 
the  text  of  the  Chapter. 

Vignette:    The   amulet    of  the    u.     Various  theories 

have  been  enunciated  about  the  tet.  It  has  been  described 
as  the  roof-tree  of  a  house,  the  four  bars  representing  four 
branches  that  stretch  out  from  the  trunk,  one  to  the  south, 
one  to  the  north,  one  to  the  west,  and  one  to  the  east. 
Some  have  said  that  it  represents  a  mason's  table,  and 
others  have  called  it  the  "  key  of  the  Nile,"  but  the  most 
probable  explanation  of  all  is  that  it  represents  some  part  of 
the  body  of  Osiris.  Many  peoples  and  tribes  in  Africa 
have  been  in  the  habit  of  preserving  carefully  a  bone 
belonging  to  the  body  of  some  great  or  beloved  ancestor, 

and  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  u  is  a  conventional 

representation  of  a  part  of  the  backbone  of  Osiris,  namely, 
the  sacrum  bone,  which,  on  account  of  its  proximity  to  the 
sperm  bag,  was  regarded  as  the  most  important  member  of 

his  body.  The  oldest  forms  of  this  bone  are  '^^  and  ~\^  • 
Now  if  we  set  this  sign  upon  a  stand  we  have  []  ,  which 
was  modified  later  into  h.  In  the  period  when  the 
Theban  Recension  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead  was  made,  the 
u  may  have   represented    the  whole    of  the    backbone    of 

Osiris,  for  it  is  said   — —  ^ 

"thy   backbone   is   to    thee,   O    Still- 


heart,  thy  neck  vertebrae  are  to  thee,  O  Still-heart !  "     It 
will    be    noted    that    the    determinative    of  the    word    for 

"  backbone, " /£7i-/ —*— ,   is"^,  which  could  easily  be,  when 


320  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

set  upright,  i,  confused  with  u.      The  tet  bone  or  bones 

came  to  be  regarded  as  a  very  powerful  amulet  at  a 
very  early  period,  and  under  the  Middle  and  New  Empires 
models  of  it  were  made  of  gold,  glass,  faience,  and  sometimes 
of  lapis  lazuli,  and  of  wood,  painted  black.  Large  wooden 
models  of  the  tet  are  often  found  in  the  wooden  hands  that 
lie  on  the  breasts  of  anthropoid  coffins,  and  under  the  later 
dynasties  large  figures  of  the  tet  were  painted  on  the 
bottoms  of  coffins,  either  inside  or  out.  These  are  some- 
times between  five  and  six  feet  long.  A  fine  collection  of 
tet  amulets  is  exhibited  in  the  Fourth  Egyptian  Room  in 
the  British  Museum. 

Text:  [Chapter  CLV.]  The  Chapter  of  the  Tet 
OF  Gold.  This  Chapter  was  a  mighty  spell  that  enabled 
the  deceased  to  rise  up,  and,  because  he  was  provided  with 
his  backbone  and  his  neck  vertebrae,  to  stand  in  his  place 
on  his  feet  ;  in  other  words  it  effected  his  resurrection.  In 
the  miracle  plays  that  were  performed  annually  at  Abydos 
and  other  towns  in  Egypt  the  "setting  upright  the  tef  and 
placing  the  head  of  Osiris  upon  it  was  the  most  important 
scene,  and  it  indicated  that  the  body  of  the  god  had  been 
reconstituted,  and  that  he  had  risen  from  the  dead.  It  is 
interesting  to  note  that  the  tet  referred  to  in  the  Chapter  is 
made  of  gold.  This  metal  was  believed  to  possess  great 
and  peculiar  properties,  because  the  blood  of  the  Sun-god 
was  made  of  gold. 

Vignette  :  The  amulet  Tet,  which  has  been  commonly 
called  a  "  buckle  "  or  "  tie,"  but  there  is  no  doubt  that  this 
figure  really  represents  the  uterus  of  Isis  with  the  adjacent 
organs.  That  it  was  supposed  to  possess  very  great  power 
is  proved  by  the  large  number  of  models  of  it  which  are 
found  in  all  important  Egyptian  collections.  It  is  usually 
made  of  red  or  reddish  stone,  red  glass,  red  porphyry,  etc., 
and  large  models  of  it  made  of  painted  wood  are  found  in 
the  wooden  hands  that  lie  on  the  breasts  of  anthropoid 
coffins.  Thus  the  deceased  went  into  the  Other  World 
bearing  in  his  hands  symbols  of  the  principal  generative 
organs  of  Osiris  and  Isis,  the  great  Ancestor-god  and 
Ancestress-goddess  of  Egypt. 

Text:  [Chapter  CLVL]  The  Chapter  of  a  Tet  of 
CARNELiAN.      The  object  of  the  recital  of  this  Chapter  is 


The  Heart  and  Pillow  Amulets  321 

clear.  It  brought  to  Ani  the  protection  that  was  to  be 
derived  from  the  blood,  and  magical  knowledge,  and 
utterances,  and  words  of  power  of  I  sis,  and  kept  away  from 
him  every  being  or  thing  that  was  an  abomination  to  him. 
When  a  carnelian  model  of  the  Tet  was  on  his  neck, 
especially  if  the  words  of  this  Chapter  were  cut  upon  it,  it 
was  as  if  the  very  life-blood  of  I  sis  were  present  there,  and 
his  resurrection  was  assured. 

Vignette  :  A  human  heart. 

Text  :  [Chapter  XXIXb.]  The  Chapter  of  a  heart 
OF  CARNELIAN.  This  is  one  of  the  three  versions  of  this 
Chapter,  of  which  two  have  already  been  described.  By  the 
recital  of  this  Chapter  Ani  identified  himself  with  the  Benu 
bird,  which  was  the  incarnate  form  of  the  heart  of  Ra,  i.e., 
he  became  the  heart  of  the  Sun-god.  He  could  then 
perform  the  labours  of  Ra,  and  direct  the  gods,  who  were 
forms  of  him.  Since  their  Heart-souls  came  forth  on  earth 
to  carry  out  the  orders  of  their  Doubles,  Ani  sees  no  reason 
why  his  Heart-soul  should  not  come  forth  to  do  the  will  of 
his  Double.  This  Chapter  well  illustrates  the  relationship 
that  existed  between  the  physical  heart,  which  was  the  seat 
of  the  Heart-soul,  and  the  Ka,  or  Double,  which  directed 
the  desires  and  inclinations  of  the  Heart-soul. 

Vignette  :  An  African  pillow,  or  head-rest. 

Text:  [Chapter  CLXVI.]  The  Chapter  of  the 
pillow,  which  is  to  be  placed  under  the  head  of  the 
Osiris  Ani  to  ward  off  evil  from  the  dead  body 
OF  the  Osiris.  The  recital  of  this  Chapter  caused  the  head 
of  Ani  to  be  lifted  up,  not  only  off  the  earth  but  into  the 
horizon,  and,  according  to  the  fuller  version  of  the 
Chapter  that  is  found  in  the  Papyrus  of  Nebseni,  it  secured 
for  him  the  services  of  Ptah,  the  Master-craftsman  who 
built  up  his  body  anew,  and  also  of  Horus,  the  son  of 
Hathor,  and  of  the  Fire-goddess  Nesert.  The  last-named 
goddess  would  supply  his  body  with  heat,  and  Horus  would 
prevent  his  head  from  being  cut  off  during  the  slaughters 
that  took  place  from  time  to  time  in  Khert-Neter.  Since 
Ani  had  power  to  lift  up  his  head  in  that  region,  it  followed 
as  a  matter  of  course  that  all  his  enemies  were  destroyed. 


322  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

PLATES  XXXIII  {continued)  AND  XXXIV 

Vignette :  A  general  view  of  the  mummy-chamber 
shovvinor  the  figures  of  the  orods  and  the  amulets  that 
protected  Ani's  mummy.  In  the  centre  of  the  chamber 
stands  the  bier,  with  a  canopy,  on  which  the  mummy  lies, 
and  beneath  it  are  the  vases  that  hold  Ani's  mummified 
internal  organs  ;  only  three  vases  are  shown  instead  of  four. 
By  the  left  side  of  the  mummy  stands  Anubis,  who  is  resting 
his  hands  upon  it  in  an  attitude  of  protection.  At  the  head 
of  the  bier  kneels  Nephthys,  and  at  the  foot  I  sis  ;  each 
goddess  is  leaning  forward  with  her  hands  resting  on  Q, 
the  symbol  of  "  eternity."  In  a  space  at  each  of  the  two 
top  corners  is  a  figure  of  the  Heart-soul  of  Ani  in  the  form 
of  a  man-headed  hawk  standing  on  a  funerary  building,  or 
his  tomb.  At  each  of  the  four  corners  of  the  inner  rectangle 
stands  a  bearded  god  in  mummified  form  ;  these  represent 
the  Four  Sons  of  Horus,  Kesta  (Mesta),  Hapi,  Tuamutef, 
and  Oebhsenuf,  and  they  stand  there  to  protect  the  internal 
organs  of  Ani,  which  are  in  the  four  jars.  Now,  we  know 
from  Chapter  CXXXVII,  which  treats  of  the  "  four  blazing 
torches"  (for  the  full  text  and  translation  see  Vol.  II, 
Appendix  at  end),  that  an  amulet  was  placed  in  a  cavity 
of  each  of  the  walls  of  the  tomb  to  protect  the  mummy 
from  any  enemies  that  might  approach  that  wall  to  do 
harm  to  the  mummy.  Thus  a  tei  of  crystal  was  placed 
in  the  West  wall,  a  figure  of  Anubis  in  the  East  wall,  a 
shabti  figure  in  the  South  wall,  and  a  reed,  to  represent  a 
palm,  in  the  North  wall.  Each  of  these  objects  was  placed 
upright  in  a  brick  made  of  crude  mud,  and  then  set  in  a 
cavity,  which  was  walled  up.  In  the  Vignette  in  the 
Papyrus  of  Ani  we  see  the  tet  at  the  top  of  the  plate  and 
the  figure  of  Anubis  at  the  bottom  ;  on  the  right  hand  is  a 
pot  of  burning  incense  °^,  which  here  represents  the  reed, 
and  in  the  bottom  left-hand  corner  is  the  shabti  figure, 
standing  below  a  second  pot  of  burning  incense.  As  to  this 
being  the  shabti  there  is  no  doubt,  for  close  by  it  is  written 
the  text  of  Chapter  VI,  which  was  commonly  cut  upon 
ushabtiu  figures.  Thus,  the  artist  made  a  mistake,  and  put 
in  two  pots  of  burning  incense  instead  of  one,  and  moved 
the  shabti  from  its  proper  place.  Having  made  this  blunder 
he  committed  another  for  the  sake  of  giving  the  Vignette  a 


The  Egyptian  Heaven  323 

symmetrical  appearance,  and  placed  another  shabti  figure  in 
the  right-hand  bottom  corner.  And  the  scribe  added  a  text 
in  which  this  figure  is  said  to  be  a  "  perfect  Heart-soul." 

Text:  [Chapter  CLI.  Without  title.]  The  text  of 
this  Chapter  consists  of  a  series  of  addresses  to  the  mummy, 
which  are  supposed  to  be  spoken  by  the  gods  and  the 
amulets.  Thus  we  have  :  (i)  Address  of  Nephthys  ; 
(2)  Address  of  Isis  ;  {3-6)  Addresses  by  the  Four  Sons  of 
Horus  ;  (7-1 1)  Addresses  by  the  Tet,  Anubis,  the  two  reeds 
with  burning  incense,  and  the  Shabti  figure;  (12)  Speech 
by  the  "Perfect  Heart-soul";  (13,  14)  Short  forms  of 
praises  by  the  two  Heart-souls.  In  the  twelve  addresses 
enumerated  above  the  gods  and  amulets  assure  Ani  that 
they  are  there  ready  to  protect  his  body,  and  to  drive  away 
from  it  any  devils  that  may  wish  to  destroy  it,  or  to  do  it 
harm.  In  the  Second  Egyptian  Room  of  the  British 
Museum  is  exhibited  a  set  of  the  four  amulets,  which  were 
taken  from  the  four  walls  of  a  tomb,  and  are  very  much  like 
those  represented  in  the  Vignette  of  this  Chapter  as  given 
in  the  Papyrus  of  Ani. 

Vignette  I  :  Ani  and  his  wife  standing  before  a  table 
of  offerines. 


^t>' 


PLATES  XXXIV  {co7itinued)  AND  XXXV 

Vignette  2  :  The  Sekhet-Hetepet,  i.e.,  "  Field  of 
Offerings,"  or  the  Elysian  Fields  of  the  Egyptians.  It  is 
supposed  to  be  in  the  sky  somewhere,  but  the  idea  of  this 
place  was  suggested  by  some  very  fertile  spot,  either  in  the 
Southern  Sudan  or  in  the  Delta.  The  following  scenes 
are  represented  : — 

1.  First  Register :  i.  Thoth,  the  scribe  of  the  gods, 
holding  his  reed  and  palette,  introducing  Ani  into  the 
Sekhet-Hetepet,  according  to  the  decree  of  the  Great 
Company  of  the  Gods  who  sat  in  judgment  on  him  at  the 
weighing  of  his  heart. 

2.  Ani,  dressed  in  white  apparel,  as  upon  earth,  standing 
before  three  gods  to  whom  he  presents  a  libation  vessel,  or 
a  pot  of  incense  ;  the  first  god  has  the  head  of  a  hare,  the 
second  that  of  a  serpent,  and  the  third  that  of  a  bull.  With 
the  exception  of  the  last,  these  three  gods  have  the  forms 


324  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

of  those   which   guard   the   First  Arit  of  the   Kingdom  of 
Osiris.      See  Chapter  CXLVII. 

3.  Ani  seated  in  a  boat,  which  is  protected  by  the  utchat 
■^^  and  contains  a  table  of  offerings  ;  he  appears  to  be 
takino-  this  to  the  o-od  at  the  end  of  the  reoister.  The  boat 
is  similar  in  form  to  that  in  which  Ra  travels. 

4.  Ani,  with  one  arm  extended  as  if  in  the  act  of 
addressing  a  god. 

5.  The  hawk  of  Horus  standing  on  the  serekh. 

6.  A  god  in  mummy  form  standing  upright;  before  him 
is  an  altar-stand  on  which  are  a  libation  vessel  and  a  lotus 
flower.  This  god  may  be  an  ancestor  of  Ani,  his  father  or 
grandfather. 

7.  Three  ovals,  which  represent  lakes.  These  have  no 
names  in  this  Vignette,  but  in  the  Papyrus  of  Nebseni  they 
are  called  Urti,  Hetep,  and  Oetqet.  Originally  they  appear 
to  have  been  small  islands.     The  two  short  lines  of  hiero- 

glyphs    read   ^  |^=^  ^  i|  4^  m  ^  r'  ^-ing 
in  Sekhet-Hetepet  [with]  air  in  the  nose." 

II.  Second  Register:  i.  Ani  reaping  wheat,  with  the 
w^^^^  "^T^"^  "the  Osiris  reapeth." 

2.  Three  oxen  treading  out  the  corn  on  a  circular  piece 
of  ground  with  a  raised  edge  to  prevent  the  grain  from 
being  scattered.  Ani  is  urging  round  the  oxen  with  cries 
and  the  flourishing  of  a  whip. 

3.  Ani  standing  with  both  hands  raised  in  adoration. 

4.  A  bird  on  a  perch,  symbol  of  "  abundance,"  or  the 
Nile-god. 

5.  Ani,  holding  the  khei'p  sceptre,  symbolic  of  his  high 
rank,  kneeling  before  two  large  heaps  of  grain,  either  dhura 
and    wheat,    or    dhura    and    barley.      The  words  U  li  U 

"^^  ^^  ^,  seem  to  indicate  that  the  grain  is  the  food  of 

the  Kau  and  Khu,  i.e.,  of  the  Doubles  and  Spirit-souls. 

6.  Three  ovals,  which  represent  three  lakes ;  in  the 
Papyrus  of  Nebseni  the  lakes  are  four  in  number,  and  they 
are  called  Nebtaui,  Uakha,  Kha,  and  Hetep. 


The  Egyptian  Heaven  325 

III.  Third  Register.     Ani  ploughing  [lu  '^^'^ 

with    a  yoke  of  oxen   in  Sekhet-Aanru    \^{\{\       (I    ^^ 
''^^^^^^*I,   a   division  of  Sekhet-Hetepet.     The  hieroglyphic 

text  reads  "  Mouth  of  the  canal  (?),  a  stream  [one  thousand 
"  cubits]  wide.  Its  length  cannot  be  stated.  No  fishes  of 
"  any   kind   Hve  in  it,  there  are  no  worms  (i.e.,  serpents) 

"in    it"^  — l^lj^'^^I^A^^^: 

^  ^  n ®^ ._ -^  ^ ^  V  **«^  (j  ix  K_ -^ 

IV.  Fourth  Register:  I.  Two  bifurcations  of  the 
streams  whereby  two  islands  are  formed.  The  upper 
island  is  the  "  Birth-place  of  the  god  of  the  city  Qenqen," 
according  to   the   Papyrus  of  Nebseni  ;  on  the  lower  is  a 

flight  of  steps  ^  and  the  legend  1  "^  111  '^^^• 

2.  A  boat,  each  end  of  which  terminates  in  the  head  and 
neck  of  a  serpent,  lying  at  the  end  of  a  short  canal.  In  the 
centre  of  it  is  a  flight  of  steps,  and  it  has  eight  oars,  four  of 
which  were  used  in  propelling  it  in  one  direction,  and  four 
in  the  opposite  direction.      By  the  side  of  it  are  the  words 

"the  god  therein  is  Unn-Nefer "  1-f|-^^Ir^'  ^nd  the 
name  of  a  part  of  a   canal   "  Ashet  "   [1    r-.   f^:;:^-     A  boat, 

1  I    U  /W>-VSA 

in  which  is  a  flight  of  steps,  floating  on  one  of  the 
streams  of  the  region  ;  in  the  Turin  Papyrus  it  is  said  to 
be  "  the  boat  wherein  Ra  Heru-Khuti  sails  in  Sekhet- 
Hetepet."  "      Above    is    written     the    word    tchefati    ^^ 

C3ED  j|  I ,  i.e.,  divine  food. 


V  1  _ae^  I  I  » 


326  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 


3.   At  the  other  end   of  this   Register  are   the  words 

I     nr,   — *-  °^  nil  ..CTj  °*=*\ 


^  ^  '  '  "^  P  ®  1  >^  P  '  ^•^•'  "  ^^^  place  of  the  Spirit- 
"  souls,  who  are  seven  cubits  high.  The  wheat  (or  dhura) 
"  is  three  cubits  high  [and]  the  Spirit-bodies  reap  it." 

Text:  [Chapter  CX.]  Here  begin  the  Chapters 
OF  Sekhet-Hetepet,  and  the  Chapters  of  Coming  Forth 
BY  Day,  and  of  going  into  and  of  coming  forth  from 
Khert-Neter,  and  of  arriving  in  Sekhet-Aaru,  and  of 

LIVING    IN    THE    GREAT    CITY  WHEREIN    IS    FRESH  AIR.        In  the 

older  papyri  Chapter  CX  is  very  long,  and  it  contains  a 
number  of  repetitions.  The  object  of  the  Chapter  was  to 
provide  the  deceased  with  an  estate  in  the  Kingdom  of 
Osiris,  wherein  he  would  live  under  conditions  closely 
resembling  those  under  which  he  lived  when  upon  earth. 
The  recital  of  the  Chapter  would  enable  him  to  obtain  food 
and  drink  in  abundance,  to  plough,  sow,  and  reap  there,  to 
marry,  to  sail  about  in  a  boat  on  the  canals,  and  to  live  a 
life  wholly  unaffected  by  any  personal  disabilities,  or  by  any 
of  the  troubles  that  formed  the  necessary  concomitants  of 
the  life  upon  earth.  Having  placated  Horus  and  Set,  the 
"  Two  Fighters,"  he  would  never  be  overcome  by  any  of 
the  minor  fiends  who  acknowledged  Set  to  be  their  overlord, 
and  having  triumphed  over  death,  and  put  away  all  the 
defects  and  the  sins  which  appertained  to  his  material  body, 
he  felt  confident  that  he  would  enjoy  the  happiness  and  the 
bliss  of  life  everlasting.  This  Chapter  is  quite  different 
from  the  CXth  Chapter  in  the  Papyrus  of  Nebseni,  and 
only  the  opening  words  of  the  second  paragraph  resemble 
any  part  of  the  text  of  the  older  papyrus.  It  is  probable 
that  the  artist  did  not  leave  space  sufficient  for  this  long 
Chapter,  and  that  the  scribe  had  only  room  to  write  down 
a  series  of  short  sentences  by  which  he  strove  to  give  the 
general  sense  of  the  ancient  proposition. 

PLATES  XXXV  {continued)  AND  XXXVI 

Vignette :  The  Osiris  Ani,  arrayed  in  white  linen 
apparel,  with  his  hands  raised  in  adoration,  presenting  the 
two  libation  vases  and  the  two  lotus  flowers,  which  are 
placed  on  stands,  to  the  god  Seker-Osiris.     This  god  is  in 


Of  Providing  Food  327 

mummy  form,  he  has  the  head  of  a  hawk,  with  the  solar 

disk  upon  it,  he  holds  in  his  hands  the  sceptre  |,  and  he 

stands  upon  the  cubit  of  niaat.  In  some  papyri  he  is  called 
"  Osiris,  lord  of  Tetu,"  and  in  the  Turin  Papyrus  he  is 
addressed    as    "  Osiris,    Lord   of  Eternity,    King,   Lord   of 

Everlastingness,  Great  God,  Governor  of  Akerti,"   jl'^  "^^^^ 

I  ®  I  ll  ^  Si  II 5 1  f1  J>  ^  ■  ^"^ '^  ^<="°'"p^"'^^ 

by  the  goddess  Amentet-Nefert,  or  "  Beautiful  Amenti." 

Text:  [Chapter  CXLVIII.]  Tpie  Chapter  of  pro- 
viding   THE    DECEASED    WITH    FOOD    IN     KhERT-NeTER.       In 

the  older  versions  of  this  Chapter  the  deceased  addresses 
the  god  who  shines  from  his  disk,  and  says  that  he  knows 
his  name  and  the  names  of  the  seven  kine  and  their  bull. 
Then  follows  a  petition  to  the  kine  and  their  bull  for  cakes 
and  ale,  and  glory  in  Khert-Neter,  and  to  be  allowed  to  be 
in  their  train,  and  to  be  born  on  their  thighs  ;  and  this  is 
followed  by  the  names  of  the  seven  kine  and  their  bull.  In 
this  papyrus  Osiris,  the  Lord  of  Maat,  the  One,  the  Lord 
of  Eternity  and  Creator  of  Everlastingness,  is  addressed  by 
Ani  who  says  that  he  has  made  offerings  to  the  seven  kine 
and  their  bull.  The  names  of  these  are  not  given  in  the 
Papyrus  of  Ani,  but  they  will  be  found  in  the  Notes  to  the 
Chapter  CXLVIII,  edited  from  another  papyrus. 

Vignette  :  The  seven  kine,  each  one  couchant  before 
a  table  of  offerings,  and  each  with  a  disk  between  her  horns, 
and  a  7nendt\y\Vi<g  on  her  back  near  the  neck.  Below  them 
is  the  bull  with  a  table  of  offerings  before  him. 

Text :  An  address  to  the  seven  kine  and  their  bull. 

Vignette  :  The  four  rudders  or  steering  oars  of  the 
Boat  of  Ra,  each  belonging  to  one  of  the  four  quarters  of 
heaven.  In  the  Turin  Papyrus  each  rudder  has  an  utchai 
^P:  behind  it. 


Text :  Four  addresses,  one  to  each  of  the  four  steering 
oars  of  heaven. 

Vignette  :  Four  triads  of  gods,  each  triad  with  a 
libation  vase  and  a  lotus  on  a  stand  before  him.  From  the 
Vignette  in  the  Turin  Papyrus  it  is  clear  that  these  four 


328  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

triads  represent  four  gods  only,  namely,  the  Four  Sons  of 
Horus,  who  appear  there  in  their  characteristic  forms. 

Text :  An  address  to  the  F'ather-gods  and  Mother- 
goddesses,  who  dwell  in  heaven  and  in  Khert-Neter,  and 
who  are  entreated  to  deliver  the  deceased  from  every  evil 
thing  that  can  be  done  unto  him  by  men,  and  by  gods,  and 
by  the  Spirit-souls,  and  by  the  dead.  Only  the  opening 
part  of  this  address  is  given  in  the  Papyrus  of  Ani. 

This  Chapter  is  one  of  the  most  important  in  the  Book 
of  the  Dead,  for  it  was  written  with  the  object  of  providing 
the  deceased  with  animal  food  and  milk  in  the  Other  World. 
One  fact  in  connection  with  it  must  be  remembered.  The 
god  addressed  is  Osiris,  or  one  of  his  forms,  and  Osiris  was 
himself  the  Bull  of  Amenti  ;  the  food  therefore  that  Osiris  is 
asked  to  give  is  himself.  Now  the  seven  kine  are  only 
incarnations  of  I  sis,  Hathor,  and  other  goddesses,  and  the 
milk  with  which  the  kine  supply  the  deceased  is  the  milk  of 
these  goddesses  ;  he  therefore  drinks  the  divine  milk 
whereon  the  grods  themselves  live.  Viewed  from  another 
aspect  the  kine  and  the  bull  supplied  the  celestial  meat  and 
milk  upon  which  Ra  the  Sun-god  lived,  and  the  Rubric 
states  distinctly  that  if  this  Chapter  be  recited  at  sunrise  on 
behalf  of  the  deceased,  its  effect  will  be  to  ensure  to  him  a 
perpetual  supply  of  food  in  abundance.  That  a  very  great 
mystery  was  associated  with  this  Chapter  is  proved  by  the 
Rubric  to  it  given  in  the  Papyrus  of  Nu,  where  it  is  ordered 
that  this  "  Book  of  Un-Nefer"  be  not  recited  by  a  man  in 
the  presence  of  anyone  except  himself  In  the  Turin 
Papyrus  (ed.  Lepsius,  Bl.  LXIX)  the  Chapter  is  said  to  be 

a  '  very  e^reat  and  real  mystery  «=x;^  ^  '^ 

^^  ^        -^       o    I  /www  ]^  ^     oil 

that  no  other  (i.e.,  outsider)  is  ever  to  know  it,  ^    ) 

^3^6  []()  / I]     '  /^~^  §  o  ?'  that  it  is  to  be  repeated  to  no  one 

'"'^  ^^  °  ^  ^  I  ,  that  no  eye  is  to  see  it,  and  no  ear 
to  hear  it  '^^  f  ^ '^-^  ^^^^  ~^^  ^  '--^^<^,  and  that 
none  of  the  dwellers  in  the  Delta  is  to  know  it  <f?^    ^ 

^  .A  ^i^z^_       jj^g   ^^^   j-j^^t  taught   the 


The  Funerary  Mountain  at  Thebes         329 

Chapter  to  him  that  recites  it  may  be  present  at  the  recital, 
as  well  as  the  reciter's  dearest  friend  -jr  ^x       {11-  6  and  7), 

Vignettes  :  The  scribe  Ani  and  his  wife  standing 
before  a  table  of  offerings,  with  hands  raised  in  adoration  of 
the  god  Seker-Osiris. 

Text:  [Chapter  CLXXXV.]  A  Hymn  of  praise  to 
Osiris  Khenti  Amenti.  In  this  hymn  Ani  praises  the 
Lord  of  Lords  and  King  of  Kings,  the  Prince  and  God  of 
Gods,  and  prays  that  Osiris  will  grant  him  a  seat  with  the 
followers  of  the  god,  and  will  permit  his  Ka  to  have 
authority  in  the  Tuat  over  all  who  are  there,  and  to  go  in 
and  come  out  at  will. 

PLATE  XXXVII 

Vignette :  The  god  Seker-Osiris,  in  mummy  form, 
standing  in  a  funerary  coffer,  the  roof  of  which  is  surmounted 
by  a  hawk  and  uraei.  He  wears  the  White  Crown,  with 
two  plumes  attached,  and  holds  in  his  hands  a  whip  /\  and 
two  sceptres  f  |.      He  is  called  "  Sekri  Osiris,  Lord  of  the 

Shetait   shrine,   great  god.  Lord  of  Khert-Neter"      ^::3:^  w 

Vignette  :  I.  The  Hippopotamus-goddess  Ta-urt 
standing  upon  the  roof  of  a  sepulchral  building.  On  her 
head  is  a  pair  of  horns  with  a  disk  between  them,  and  she 
holds   in   her   right   fore-foot   a  whisk  {?),  and  in  her  left, 

which  rests  upon  ¥  the  symbol  of  the  magical  fluid  of  life, 
the  symbol  of  "life,"  ■¥-.      Before  her  are  two  altar-stands 

on  which  rest  many  offerings,  cakes,  joints  of  meat,  fruit, 
vegetables,  flowers,  etc. 

Vignette  :  2.  The  tomb  of  Ani  in  the  mountain  of 
Western  Thebes.  The  tomb  is  a  rectangular  building  with 
a  cornice  surmounted  by  a  pyramid,  in  one  side  of  which  is 
the  niche  in  which  Ani's  Heart-soul  rested  when  it  returned 
from  the  Other  World  to  visit  his  body  in  the  tomb. 
VOL.  I.  z 


330  The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

Similar  niches  may  still  be  seen  in  the  pyramids  at  Mercie, 
and  in  front  of  one  at  least  is  a  ledge  on  which  the  soul  may 
alight.  In  front  of  the  tomb  is  a  small  portico,  the  roof  of 
which  is  supported  by  a  pillar  with  a  papyrus  capital. 
From  a  small  pool  or  lake  close  to  the  tomb  spring  a 
number  of  large  flowering  plants.  From  the  mountain 
itself  projects  the  head  of  the  Cow-goddess  Hathor  in  her 
character  of  goddess  of  Amenti.  Between  her  horns  are  a 
disk  and  two  plumes. 

Text:  [Chapter  CLXXXYI.  Without  title.]  The 
text  of  the  Chapter  is  incomplete  and  lacks  the  prayers  that 
are  found  in  other  papyri  ;  only  a  few  of  the  titles  of  Hathor 
are  enumerated.  With  these  words  and  the  accompanying 
Vignettes  the  Papyrus  of  Ani  comes  to  an  end. 


List  of  Hymns  and  Chapters  331 


LIST    OF     HYMNS    AND    CHAPTERS    IN 
THE  PAPYRUS  OF  ANI 


Hymn    to    Ra,  ^   ll    ;    ^ 

J 


O 


C^      7j( 


Hymn      to     Osiris      Un-Nefer, 


Chapter 

I  .^ 


0 


ra 


1 1 1 


.y\ 


O 


II 


AAAAAA    ^-^  y\ 


O 


VI  [Without  title] 


VIII 


IX 


l_ftA/VW\J     ^    ^         _^^    "U    I' 


o 


o 


[ — ]  c^y\ 


f^^^  w^s  1 


A 


nrj 


Plate 
I 


II 


V.  VI 


^?fTk 


VOL.    I. 


XXXIII 
XVIII 

XVIII 
2    A 


332 


The  Papyrus  of  Ani 


Chapter 
X 


I  I  I 


o 


1 


Plate 
XVIII 


XV 


^^llk^JZk 


f 


XVIII-XXI 


XVII 


^ks 


is^ra 


^^^^ka 


VII-X 


[A  large  section  omitted.] 


XVIII  Introductions  (A  and  B),  text  ^  A- 

J,  and  Rubric.     [Without  title] 


XII-XIV 


XVIII  Duplicate  copy,   without    Introduc- 

tion, but  with  Rubric.     [Without 
title] 


XXIII,  XXIV 


XXII 


VI 


XXIII 


XV 


^''•^  ±il  o  fU^ 


XV 


XXVI 


^-^         A_AAAAA      — **— »^- 


AAA^VSA         ^^  I 


XV 


Chapter 
XXVII 


List  of  Hymns  and  Chapters 

o  ^   W 


333 


C>n   tr     HJ?^     c^ 


tQ»    AAAAAA      1^ 


XXIX  ,     ,        Ix     ^^^^ 


^^imr 


O 


Ui 


Plate 
XV 


XV 


XXIX  B  ,     V  I  ^ 

/VWVAA     /VA/VsAA        |     LJ        QUI 


XXXIII 


XXX  B 


/W\/V\A        ,^ 


^'^^^ 


Uil%\0 


i^ 


XXX  B         Duplicate  copy.     [Without  title] 


XV 


III 


XLIII 


XLIV 


I 

AAAAAA    Cfjl   •  IT 


I      1^ 


d    a  ^  a      ^  Px 


>=n:. 


O 


S^ 


£:i     a  ci 


o>    a  <=> 


XLVI  I     ^-    ^~|l^ ^^ 


f 


XVII 


XVI 


XLV 


XVI 


334 

Chapter 
XLVIII 


The  Papyrus  of  Ani 

M^   1  ^^ 

1  m 


AAAA/VA      C^y\ 


o    a, ^. 


^^nnr  _B^  z1  A 


LIV 


1 

1    m 


d 
f^^^ 


1  n  ^^--^ 


S'i}SPPf4^^i^K 


©^        /www    Q^  c3 


LXI  I  NUi u.  "       l_/^ 


k^^^^ 


LXXII      Rubric 


LXXIV     *T*:^tiS  ^   ,■■■_ 


LXXVII 


p^w«^ 


LXXVII  I 


ruikji 


1 


Ok 


Plate 
XVIII 


XVI 


XV 


XVI 


XV 


VI 


XVIII 


XXV 


XXV,  XXVI 


List  of  Hymns  and  Chapters  335 


Chapter 
LXXX 

LXXXI 
LXXXII 

Lxxxrv 

LXXXV 


LXXXVI 

LXXXVII 

LXXXVIII 


■<s>- 


D  O 


•<2>- 


1         W^  AAA/VAA 


Cl 


I    @v        D 


Tllike 


o 


\ 


U  I 


iJMA 


ruikpj 


Plate 
XXVIII 


XXVIII 
XXVII 

XXVIII 
XXVII 

XXV 
XXVII 
XXVII 


AAAAAA   __ 


LXXXIX     ^^^^:^|(]|]^^' 


XCI        T    .^    InT^    ^    (1^^ 


"^^^ 


xcii   ^  ^  u=^  Q  ft  (1  w  ^"5 


I 


ra   o  44.  ^    ^_7i 


^ 


il^^^ 


XVII 


XVII 


XVII 


336 


The  Papyrus  of  Ani 


Chapter 
XCIII 


Plate 
XVII 


^    l^^fj^l^ 


^ 


CX 


CXXIV 


fl.Mi-   I   I    I     I    i^^\.  ^    D  I    I 


AAAAAA 


cxxv 


ra 

Part  I. 


XXXIV 


XXIV 


I^WF  ^aaaaa 


^^ 


© 


XXX 


CXXV 


cxxv 

cxxv 

CXXVI 
CXXXII 


An  Introduction  to  the  "  Negative 
Confession  "  peculiar  to  the 
Papyrus  of  Ani 

Part  II.  The  "Negative  Confession,"        XXXI,  XXXII 
i.e.,  a  series  of  Forty-two  negative 
statements   made  by  Ani  to  the 
Forty-two   Judges    who    sat   with 
Osiris  in  the  Hall  of  Maati 

Part  III.     [Wanting  in  the  Papyrus 
of  Ani] 


Rubric.     This  is  placed  under  the 
Vignette  of  Chapter  CXXVI 

Vignette  only 


y^ 


XXX 

XXXIII 
XVIII 


■<E>- 


©•^ 


c^^''"'  ^^^? 


ic     O    i 


XXI 


List  of  Hymns  and  Chapters 


337 


Chapter 
CXXXIII      Rubric 


Plate 
XXII 


CXXXIV     ic 


ra 


^ 


o 
I 


XXII 


•*:    O     I 

CXLVIII      Of  the  giving  of  food  to  the  Spirit-     XXXV,  XXXVI 
soul     in     Khert-Neter,    and    of 
delivering  him  from  all  evil  things. 
[Without  title  in  the  Papyrus  of 
Ani] 

CLI      The  plan  of  the  Mummy-chamber.  XXXIII,  XXXIV 

[Without  title  in  the  Papyrus  of 

Ani] 


CLV        I     tt  I  Jf  ^'^^^^  ri=n 


XXXIII 


CLVI 


CLXVI 


I  ^ 


AAf^VV\    ^     I         1 


^^ 


I 


CLXXV         I      . 


CLXXXV     ^ 


mu 


c^      o 

I  I  I 


A fl 


m 


XXXIII 


XXXIII 


XXIX 


XXXVI 


CLXXXVI      [Without   title    in   the    Papyrus    of 
Ani] 


XXXVII 


NEW  Y/RK  UiJiVERSITY 

wnsiiiiiGicfi  mm 

•  U'JRArtY  • 


THE  PAPYRUS  OF  ANI: 
REPRODUCTION  IN  ^^ 
COLOURED  PLATES 


VOL.  I.  2  A  2 


^ 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE 


THE  PAPYRUS  OF  ANI 


I  — Vignette  :  Ani, 
"Scribe  of  llie  Sacred 
Revenues  of  all  the  gods 
of  Thebes"  and  admini- 
strator of  "the  Granaries 
of  the  Lords  of  Abydos," 
and  his  wife  Tulu  before 
a  table  of  olTerings  of 
meal, cakes, fruit,  (lowers, 
etc 

7Vv/:  Hymn  inhonour 
of  the  sun-god  Kfiathis 


I  ^ 


^'^^>d. 


I  z 


isri: 


!-• 


i^ — •  /^ 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  DEAD 


THE  PAPYRUS  OF  ANI 


2.—  Vigttetics-  (rf)Isis 
and  Nephthvs.the  sisters 
of  Osiris,  'kneeling  in 
adoration  on  the  left  and 
right  of  the  Tat,  a  sym- 
bol of  Osiris,  which  sta'nds 
upon  the  Solar  Movmt 
and  supports  the  Sig.i  of 
Life  upholding  the  Sun- 
disk.  The  ornaments 
upon  the  heads  of  the 
two  goddesses  are  the 
hieroglyphic  signs  of 
their  names.  On  each 
side,  three  cynocephaii 
or  dog-headed  apes,  the 
transformed  openers  of 
the  eastern  portals  of 
heaven,  raising  their 
hands  in  ;idoration.  [b) 
Ani  and  his  wife  before 
a  table  of  off(;rings. 

Text  :  Invociition  to 
Osiris. 


17  18  16  14  13  12  11 


to 


21  22  23  24  25  30  29  28  27  26 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  DEAD 


THE  PAPYRUS  OF  ANI 


3, —  Vi(^tictte:  Above, 

order,  as  judges,  before 
a  table  of  offerings.  Be- 
low, the  Psychostasia, 
or  Weighing  of  the 
Conscience :  the  jackal- 
hcadcd  Annbis  trying 
in  the  Balance  the 
heart  (conscience)  of 
the  deceased  against  the 
feather  symbolical  of 
Law;  on  the  left,  Ani 
and  his  wife  in  an  atti- 
tude of  devotion  ;  on  the 
right,  the  ibis-headed 
Thoth.  the  scribe  of  tlie 
gods,  noting  down  the 
result  of  the  trial,  and 
behind  him  the  monster 
Amemit,  the  Devourer. 
On  the  left  of  the  bai- 
ance.Shai  (Destiny)  with 
the  two  goddesses  Ke- 
nenit  and  Meschenit  be- 
hind him  ;  above  them, 
the  soul  of  Ani,  as  a 
human-headed  hawk, and 
the  symbol  of  the  cradle. 
Text:  On  the  left,  the 
address  of  Ani  to  his 
heart ;  on  the  right,  the 
sentence  of  acquittal. 


MINI 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  DEAD 


THE  PAPYRUS  OF  ANI 


4- —  I  'ignette:  The  prc- 
si-ntation  of  Ani,  tri- 
umphant, to  Osiris.  The 
goi[  enthroned  within  a 
shrine;  beliind  him,  Isis 
and  Neplithys  ;  in  front, 
a  lotus-tlower,  on  which 
are  the  four  children  of 
llorus,  ^eniiof  thedead. 
On  the  left,  llorus  leads 
forward  Ani;  who  again 
kneels,  with  whitened 
hair,  and  presents  offer- 
ings. 

Texl :  The  address  of 
llorus  to  Osiris, announc- 
ing the  righteousness  of 
Ani ;  and  the  prayer  of 
Ani. 


L-  -s^  '•gas"""^?:' 


10  >  S  7 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  DEAD 


THE  PAPYRUS  OF  ANI 


n 


r1^ 


^ 


± 

T 
rrr 


fg;^44i 


-t 
^ 


o 

Pi 


(ft 


i 


— « 

en 


T 


in 


ESI 

IF 

■c:r> 

9 


FF 


in 


»-^ 


O 

> — 'O 

m 


La 


en 


3if 


Si 


I 

I  n 


F  F 
It 


s 


if 

A 


F  F 

« — y 


n 


5  —Vi<i»etle:  Fu- 
neral procession  :  the 
mummy  on  a  boat- 
shapeii  hearse,  drawn 
by  oxen ;  beside  it 
kneels  the  mourning 
wife  ;  in  front,  a  priest 
olTiciates  ;  behind  fol- 


o\v     mourners,     z 
ervants    drawing 


,nd 


funereal  shrin 
bcaringarticlesforthe 
lomb,  among  whieh  is 
the  deceased'swriling 
pallet. 

Text :  Chapter  i  uf 
the  Book  of  the  Dead. 


••         WW 


^\ 


^ 


I-& 


<3> 


M^ 


\ 


DP 


^ 


Cl 


S3t 


10  1  2 

RUBRIC  OF 
CHAP.  LXXII 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  DEAD 


THE  PAPYRUS  OF  ANI 


6.  —  Vignette  :  Fu- 
neral procession  con- 
tinued :  ministrants 
carrying  sepulchral 
furniture ;  a  hand  of 
female  mourners.  On 
the  right,  the  tomb, 
in  front  of  which 
Anubis  supports  the 
m  u  mmy,  the  mou  rn  i  ng 
wife  kneeling  before 
it.  Facing  the  mum- 
my, two  priests  oHi- 
ciate  before  a  table 
of  offerings  ;  behind 
them,  a  priest  reads 
the     funeral     service 


from 
shav 


papyr 


stbr 


forward  an  oITering : 
the  calf  and  cowabove 
symbolize  the  rising 
Sun  and  Heaven. 

Text:  Chapter  22, 
and  rubric  of  the  72nd 
chapter  of  the  IBook 
of  the  D(-acl. 


24  25  26  27  28 


29  30 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  DEAD 


THE  PAPYRUS  OF  AN! 


T.—  Vignelles:  (a) 
Ani,  playing  at 
draughts,  logctlier 
wilh  Ills  wife,  within 
a  hall,  (h)  Their  two 
.suuls  standing  above 
the  tomb ;  in  front  of 
them,  an  altar  with  a 
libation  -  vase  .ind 
Intus-flowers.  (<-)Thc 
Sun  disk  in  the  solar 
mount,  with  the  ca- 
nopy ofheaven  above; 
on  either  side  the 
lions  "  Yesterday  " 
and  "The  Morrow." 
otlierwise  Osiris  and 
Ka.  (,l)  The  Heron, 
identilied  with  Osiris ; 
an  altar  with  vase 
and  Intns-flower  be- 
fore   him.       (e)    The 

withlsisandNi-phthys 
in  the  form  of  tw'in 
birds  ;     beneath     the 


writing  pallet,  etc. 

Te.xl:  Chapter  17 
("of  the  praisings  and 
gloril.calioi.s  ol  com- 
ing forth  and  entering 
in  the  nether-world," 
etc.)  of  the  Hook  of 
the  Dead. 


:sS-^f 


^ 


f  ?r 

^^__^  I «  •  • 


^ 


¥ 

Ay 


JL 


IF 


*i2 


i^ 


r^ 


JEra 


o 

[Tf 


Tf 

ft 


r\|^!/2l 


if! 


^ 
^ 


f  »»  ■ 


Hi 


iXD 


m 


^^ 


5 


o  %% 


tr 


^ 

9^^"^ 
(*!, 


^ 


6   ! 

I   I 

^  < 


36  37 

CHAP,  XVII 


45 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  DEAD 


THE  PAPYRUS  OF  ANI 


S.—  l/,c;,te//es:  (a) 
A  seated  male  figure, 
Willi  the  emblem  of 
"  millions  of  years" 
in  his  right  hand  and 
on  his  head  ;  his  left 
h<ind  extended  above 
the  liyeofHorus.  (i) 
A  male  figure  stand- 


<itli 


stretched  above  the 
lakes  of  "  Maaat"  and 
"Hesmen"  (natron). 
((•)  A  pylon,  or  gate 
with  folding  doors; 
"  The  Door  of  the 
Funeral  f^assages." 
(</)  The  !•  ye  of  Horus 
upon  a  [jedestal  {<■} 
The  great  cow"  Meh- 
urit,  the  Kve  of  Ra." 
(/)  A  funereal  chest, 
surrounded  by  the  four 
children  ol  Horus, 
with  Ra  rising  from 
it  holding  the  Sign  o( 
Life  in  each  hand 

Text:  Chapter  17 
(continued)  of  the 
Book  of  the  Dead. 


m- 


n 


^ 


oil 


fl 


^ 


4: 


0**e:0 


-i^ 


SFfH 


^ 

^ 


I  I 


iUII 


I        =r 


^   UL 


Tl 


^ 

u 

^ 


i  o 

-.1  -CSa^h 


i 


I 


T 


r 


73  74 

CHAP.  XVII. 


75  76  77 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  DEAD 


THE  PAPYRUS  OF  ANI 


<)—Vignetle!:  (a) 
l'-l':ven  deitips,  viz., 
Maaf.alf,Kher-beqa-f, 
Heru.  Khent  an-maat, 
ami  Anubis,  and  the 
seven  gods  identified 
with  the  seven  stars 
of  the  constellation 
of  the  Great  Bear. 
(b)  1  he  souls  of  Ra 
and  Osiris  between 
two  Tats,  signifying 
(heir  mi-eting-place. 
Tattn. 

Tex  I :  C  hapter  1 7 
(continued)  of  the 
Rook  of  the  Dead. 


31 


132         133 


13A 


135        136  137  138         139 


140 


\  cat  in  front  of  a 
icrsL-a  tree  cutting  off 
In-  licad  of  a  serpent, 


nliolis 


;tlie 


un-i(od  Ra  slaving 
hf  dragon  of  Dark- 
K'ss;  the  gods  Hu. 
d  tlieir  fatiier 


Sa 

Tmu  looking  on.  (4) 
Ani  and  Ills  wife  ador- 
ioL,'  the  scarab-headed 
god    Kiiepera,  of  the 

in  the  Solar  Bark 
floating  on  the  heaven 
with  an  altar  and 
lotus -flower  before 
him;  two  cynocephali, 
spirits  of  dawn,  with 


■sta 


■  the 


hands  in  adoration, 
the  eye  of  the  return- 
ing sun  before  them. 
(t)  The  god  Tmu,  the 
closer  of  the  dav, 
s-aled,withinthe  Sun- 
disk,  in  the  Solar 
I'.ark,  facing  an  altar 
with  lotus-flower,  {d) 
A  couchant  lion  on  a 
pedestal,  embower- 
ed in  lotus-flowers, 
a,nong  which  is  a 
serpent  "  Uatchit  the 


.  nbolizing 
.e  Dawn,  and  the 
lame  of  lire. 
Text:  Chapter  17 
ontinued)  of  the 
00k  of  the  Dead. 


17        16       15     14      13     12        11  10         9  8         7  e         5 


10       9         876         5432        1 
CHAP.  CXLV!.  FIRST  PYLON 


THE    BOOK    OF    THE    DEAD 


CHAP    CXLVII. 


FIRST  ARIT 


THE    PAPYRUS    OF    ANI 

SECOND  ARIT 


THIRD  ARIT 


^m 


HM|i([i!wM£'i*-fii^!(!;-lEr|<?^ 


CHAP.  CXL.VI 


and  his  wife  approach- 
injj(rt)  the  seven  gates 
called  Arit  and  (*) 
the  ten  Pylons  of 
Osiris  (extending  into 
Plate  12).  I'.ach  of 
the  Arit  gates  is 
guarded  by  a  Door- 
keeper, a  Watclier, 
and  a  Herald  ;  and 
each  of  the  Pylons  by 
a  Doorkeeper. 

7V.V/ :  Chapters  1 46 
and  147  of  the  Book 
of  the  Dead  ;  being 
the  names  of  the 
guardians  of  the  Arit 
gate 


th< 


iddr 


ade 


by  Ani  to  those  gods. 


THIRD  PYLON 


FOURTH  PYLON 


FIFTH  PYLON 


SIXTH   PYLON 


CHAP.  CXLVII.  CONTINUED.      FIFTH  ARIT 


8765 

4             3            2            f            9            8          7 

^ 

4  3  2^7 

SEVENTH    PYLON 


5  4  3 

EIGHTH   PYL< 


CHAP.  CXLVII.  CONTINUED,      FirrH  ARIT 


THE    PAPYRUS    OF    AN! 

SEVENTH  ARIT 


INTRODUCTION  TO  CHAP.  XVIN.-A 


I J  — Vignettes:  [<i) 
Conliiiualinn  of  the 
vignetl.s  ill  Plate  it. 
(A).\ni(wfaringsan- 
dal.s)  and  his  wife, 
twicf  represented, 
preceded  by  a  priest 
rolled  in  the  panther, 
skin  and  advancing 
towards  two  pvlons 
(see  Plate  13).    ' 

Text:  Chapters  146 
and  147  (continued) 
of  the  Hook  of  the 
Dead  :  and  invoca- 
tions of  the  priests 
and  of  Ani,  forming 
an  introduction  to 
Chapter  iX  of  the 
Book  of  the  Ucad, 
whi.h  contains  the 
l.ilanv  of    Ihoth, 


8EV6NTH   PYLON 

CHAP.   CXLVI.  CONTINUED 


EIGHTH   PYLON 


NINTH  PYLON 


TENTH   F^LON 


INTRODUCTION  TO  CHAP.   XVIII.      B 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  DEAD 


THE  PAPYRUS  OF  ANI 


Iwii  pylons  whereby 
;irf  apiiriwchcd  the 
Korls  which  preside 
iivercerlain  localities, 
twenty-three  of  whom 
are  here  depicted, 

Tex/:  Chapter  1 8 
of  the  Book  of  the 
Dead. 


Z9| 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  DEAD 


THE  PAPYRUS  OF  ANI 


14—  Vienetles  : 
iin'terii  ol  Ihe  gods 
\  l.oc.'ilities  (con- 
niicd  fmm  Plate  .3). 

Text:  CliaiHcr  iS 
ontiiiuud;  of  ih.,- 
uok  ol  the  Dead. 


It 

is 


2 


:^^fc' 


^<?*  HLi  feSi- ?^ 

,ri£r- Kr/ KT  S/n 


»  •  • 


Skw 


D 


1  2 

CHAP.  XXIII 


5  1 

CHAP.  X 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  DEAD 


THE  PAPYRUS  OF  ANI 


fit 


■'1  ^^^ 


rrr 
it 


^M^ 


'iMMl 


^h— Vignette!.:  («) 
A  prifst  raisin}^  above 
iht  head  of  Aiii  the 
instrument  to  open 
hisnn)iilli,toilUistiiite 
ilii-  t  li.ipter  "  of  open- 
ip.K  111.'  rn.nith"  (/;) 
Am  MKiking  an  offer- 
ing to  llie  jaLkiil- 
litaded  Anubis,  to  il- 
lustrate the  L'iinpter 
"of  giving  his  heart 
to  the  deceased."  [c-e) 
Ani  carrying  his  soul, 
to  illustrate  "that  the 
sovil  of  the  person  may 
not  he  taken  from 
him  :  "  carrying  an  in- 
flated sail,  to  illustrate 
the  chapter  "of  giving 
air  ;  "  and  advancing 
with  a  staff. 

Text :  Chapters  23, 
24,  26,  30B,  61,  54,  29, 
and  27.  of  the  Book 
of  the  Dead  :  opening 
the  mouth,  bringing 
words  of  power,  se- 
curing the  heart,  and 
giving  air  to  the  de- 
ceased, in  the  nether- 
world. 


2  3 

CHAP.  XXVII 


7  1  2 

CHAP    LVIII 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  DEAD 


THE  PAPYRUS  OF  ANI 


ifi—  I'igiiellfs:  {a) 
Ani,  will,  his  11,-arl 
plac.-d  before  him, 
supplicatii.nfourgntls, 
to  illustrate  "that  tlir 
lirart  of  a  persoti  may 
not  be  taken  from 
bim."  {«,  cjAniand 
Ills  wiff  drinking  vva. 
ter;  and  Nut,  the 
goddess  of  tlie  sl<y, 
in  the  sycamore  tree, 
giving  fruit  to  Ani : 
to  illustrate  the  chap- 
ters  "of  breathing  air 
and  seruriug  water." 
(./)  Alii  seated  before 
an  altar,  to  illustrate 
the  chapter  "of  not 
dying  the  second 
death."  ie)  Anubis 
holding  the  mummy 
of  .'\ni,  to  illustrate 
the  chapter  "of  not 
turningto  corruption." 
U)  A  pylon,  with  a 
heron  ar>d  a  soul,  (g) 
Ani  turning  from  the 
knife  and  block,  to 
illustrate  the  cbapler 
"  of  not  cr)tering  into 
the  place  of  divine 
cxeculi')n." 

Tixl  ■■  Chapters  27 
(continued),  58,  59, 
44.  45'  46.  .'!'>.  and  93, 
of  the  Hook  of  the 
Dead. 


CHAP.  XL/ 


CHAP.  XCIII 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  DEAD 


THE  PAPYRUS  OF  ANI 


Ani  adoriiii;  a  Iri.idof 
gods.  (A)  Ani.wilhhis 
writing  pallet  in  his 
left  liaiid,  addicssing 
agod.who  with  tiirnt:n 
head  is  seated  in  a 
boat,  (c)  Thi!  soul 
of  Ani  visiting  his 
inumniilied  body,  to 
ilhislrate  the  cllalJler 
■■ofr.-.unitihglh.-^oul 
111  lh(:  di-ad  b„ilv." 
(,/)  I'lu-M.idslandnig 
liclure  a  door-way,  to 
illustrate  the  chaplrr 
"that  the  soul  of  a 
person  may  not  be 
imprisoned." 

Text :  Chapters  93, 
4,?,  f>9.  01,  and  <)i.  of 
Ihr  Hook  of  the  Dead, 


CHAP.  UOCXIX 


5  6  7  8 

CHAP.   XCII     CONTINUED. 


9  10 


12 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  DEAD 


THE  PAPYRUS  OF  ANI 


CHAP.   XCII    CONTINUED. 


CHAP.  LXXtV 


CHAP.  CXXXII 


CHAP.  X  iXLVIll. 


2  3  4  5 

CHAP.  XV    CONTINUED. 


12 


9  — Viffneties:  [a 
i  adoring  the  Sur 
I  in  his  Bark.     {I 
<riL.  '  Ani  and  his  wife. 

Text:  Chapter  i 
(continued),  includin 
hymn  to  Ra,  and  1 
tany  to  Osiris. 


CHAP.   XV     CONTrNUEO. 


LITANY  TO  OSIRIS 


HYMN  TO  RA 


-^   jj^HJi^l  111  IM   ^lil   I.I  tiM>i  III    liii  i  Mil    iiTTlXX 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  DEAD 


THE  PAPYRUS  OF  ANI 


kl^^s^ltf^t^ 


20. —  Vignette:  Osi- 
i.  with  the  sceptre, 
lil,    and    hook,    and 


Text:  Chapter  15 
of  the  Hook  of  the 
Dead,  (continued)  : 
Hymns  to  the  Sun- 
god. 


\^ 


1 
niF 


cs>T 


o 


TO 


I— A 


H 


llf^-im 


i<> 


iM 


±3 


n 


© 


•  < 


60  a 


^ 


4' 


4 

•  •  • 


^qm 


2 


^ 


1  iLo 


_^.jf 


«t1 


fF 


...6 

2 

lU 


i^ 


^ 

^ 


41 


i 

ergo 


0 


,^ 


^ 


C^"' 


mu 


4 

•    •>  • 


;4> 


3 


EMMt£ 


-s 


^  ^ 


1.^ 


20  30  31  32 

CHAP,   XV.    CONTINUED. 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  DEAD 


THE  PAPYRUS  OF  ANI 


2\.— Vignette  :  Ani 
Ihe  Solar  Bark,  ador- 
g  the  Sun-god. 
Trxt :  Cliapters  i  5  (con- 
iiuedl  and  133  of  tl,e 
uok  of  the  Dead,  con- 
ning hymns  to  the 
n-god. 


CHAP.  CXXXIIl, 


16  17  18  19  20 

CHAP.  CXXXIII.    CONTIMUED.  RUBRIC 


23  24 


THE    PAPYRUS    OF    ANI 


22. —  Vignettes:  The 
Sun-god  in  his  Bark. 

Text  ;  Chapters  133 
(continued)  and  134  of 
the  Booli  of  the  Dead. 

At  the  end  of  the 
Plate  is  the  ladder  or 
flight  of  steps  by  which 
the  soul  passes  to  visit 
the  body  in  the  tomb. 


CHAP.    CXXXIII.    CONTINUED. 


CHAP.   CXXXIV. 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  DEAD 


THE  PAPYRUS  OF  ANI 


J 

D 

I i 

n 

a 


li 


m 

If 
fj 


O 


<^==l 


1^ 


^ 

^r?^ 


i. 


1 


l—i-i 

:2 


!-:£. 


oili 


^«f| 


a 


£1 


^z^ 


^ 

-.€) 


fi 

'^  a 


IF 

r  JUL 
o 


Ff 


.?1 


£ 


:iz 


ife 


U^ 


^ 


— — t- 


IF 


o 


5L 

I  ■fi' 


^ 


Wr-^ 


Li 


\\ 


o 


^ 


^ 


^ 


t 

4 


FT 


11 


ft 


<0 


O 


♦  ♦  ♦ 


iF 
L! 

i 4 

O 


4 

FF 


F' 


i 


^ 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  DEAD  THE  PAPYRUS  OF  AN! 


23. —  Vi^netie:  Ani 
aiioring  tlie  Powers 
.if  Localities,  twenty 
(»f  whom  arc  here 
depicted  (see  Plates 
'3-'5)- 

Text:  Chapter  tX 
(repeated)  of  the  Book 
of  the  Dead. 


CHAP.  XVIII. 


THE    PAPYRUS    OF    ANI 


24  —  Vignettes 
(//)  Eleven  of  the 
Powers  of  Locali- 
ties  (continued  from 
Plale  23).  [b)  Ani 
and  his  wife  adoring 
a  triad  of  gods.     . 

Text  :  Chapters 
18  (continued)  and 
124  of  the  Book  ol 
the  Dead  ;  the  latter 
(iescrihing  the  de- 
i-eased's  triumphant 
progress  an-i  state 
..(  bliss. 


CHAP.    XVIII    CONTINUED 


CHAP     CXXIV 


I 


CHAP.  LXXXVI 


CHAP,  LXXVM 


CHAP.  LXXVII 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  DEAD 


THE  PAPYRUS  OF  ANI 


^fliits 


^^/!£# 


n 


1  iiiY 


PV 

& 


I  1 1 

M 


<^ 


-"J^      Oca 


id.—Tcxt: 
7S  (continuec 
Book  of  the  1 


CHAP.  LXXVIII  CONTINUED- 


L 

m 

A 


t  •  I 


4^ 


nr 


il5 

4. 

■n 


'iiiiii^ ' 


E 


1  •  • 


MB 


4. 


•  I  I 


•  •  * 


I  o 


a_ 


4 

I  o 


L      > 


R 


2* 


Ti 


1, 


41 


^1  "-1^ 


<^ 


55 


56 


57  58  1  2 

CHAP.  LXXXVII 


4  12 

CHAP.  LXXXVIII 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  DEAD 


THE  PAPYRUS  OF  ANI 


CHAP.  LXXXVII 


CHAP.  LXXXVIN 


CHAP.  LXXXII 


CHAP.  LXXXV 


CHAP.  LXXXIN 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  DEAD 


THE  PAPYRUS  OF  ANI 


i 

n 

\4L 


IP 

rif' 


^ 
^ 


^ 
^ 


lA 


If 


.14: 


^d 


u 


m 

g 


rrr 


tt- 

I  n 
O* 


® 


41 
¥ 


'P 

lU 

4. 

II  lO 


41 


T 


.5 

Si 

nr 


Ul 


0^ 

uua 


Yi 


4C 


X 


An 


4. 
it 


^ 
(£ 


,»-  I  -fr 


4- 


4: 


if 

7 


4 

H 


-4. 

4: 


4: 


4: 

ILL 

■ 

4: 


n 


nllj 


1  ^ 

4: 


4: 


1  <^ 


m 

4: 


tL 


4: 


¥ 


1^     ©    r — 2 

^    \(0-~\h,^ 


M 

Sj 


4: 

I— =1 

*? 


©i 


i 
// 


4: 

4: 


t 


n 


FF 


1^ 


SI 


en 


10   Mr 


41 


Mm 


4. 

It 

m 

Ul 

o 

? — 

T 

1 


CHAP.  LXXXIV 


CHAP.  LXXXI  / 


CHAP.  LXXX 


26 


28  27  28  25  24  2J 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  DEAD 


THE  PAPYRUS  OF  ANI 


29 — Vignelles:  [n) 
Ani  ami  his  wife  arlor- 
ing  Thoth.  (h)  Ani 
and  his  wife  before  a 
table  of  offerings. 

Texi :  Chapter  175 
of  Ihe  Book  of  the 
Dead  i  and  the  latter 
portion  of  a  new  chap- 
ter wliich  begins  in 
I'late  lo 


CHAP.  CLXXV 


4. 


I   2. 


jr 


JIlHIIHI 


rr 


•  •  • 


it 


^ 

^ 
^ 


IIIIIIIHII 


T 


fC 


^( 


l_ 


^ X 


1! 
f 


4»  ^£^ 


En 


fWillUill 


T" 


JX. 


O 
II 


JIIIIIUI 


1    ■  I 


^ 
^ 


<: 


] 


18  17 

CHAP.  CXXV 


14 


13 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  DEAD 


THE  PAPYRUS  OF  ANI 


4fe»  ^^  O- 


4: 

L 


y^ 


ft 


4 


^ 


5i 


4: 
"  11 


#2 


[U 


C 


l^s;=fc 


Ff 


ll 
rt 

2. 


-CSX 


^ 


FL 


ft 


^^^ 
j^^ 

il 


U 

-0 


^ 


/N.4. 


:^t^ 


^«^ 
s^ 


30. —  Vignettf.  Osi- 
ris and  Isis  within  a 
shrine  ;  before  them  a 
lotus-flower  on  which 
stand  the  four  children 
of  Horus,  genii  of  tlie 
dead. 

Text  :  An  intro- 
ductory chapter  to  the 
Negative  Confession. 


CHAP.  CXXV 


Nl 


.--,««'4!f!!f?n-";';  ■"^^■^n^ii^^^m'^^m.  ;^^'.*f*^^.. 


I  '■    -^     P  "8  -^! 


m\       In 


iLiL-i    X\\\ 


Hi  1^1  II  1^1  i.l    i    1   1:1    Hi  I   11. 1  II  l?l  l-iTTTT 


in    HI    l^■illL■^^^■l   la 


CI 


15 


Cf 


m 


4 


# 


oTf 


ri 


CI 


o 


o 


o 


/1^ 

r-1 


SOF 


^. 


LLi 


.-XL. 


_n 


C3 
II 


in 


JQ_. 


Jl. 


•Pi 


I "? 


n 
I 


21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  DEAD 


THE  PAPYRUS  OF  ANI 


CHAP.  CXXV        THE   NEGATIVE   CONFESSION 


Ll 


a  \ . 


I] 


/. 


ZM 


>^ 


iU. 


7^ 


-21 
1 


>L 


-if 


3T 


-lliL. 


ilL 


^ 


*. «  « 


£Jl 


STL 


CLtLtl 


A 


A 


ft 

6l 


^1 


■ .  1 


c 


[^ 


yy 

^^y^ 


^^-'-^ 


H 


1^ 


^'J- 


r==i 


JDS 


S 


£: 


FJ 


Ls 


D 


£ 


i 


// 


ft; 


10  11 


12 


13 


14  15 


16 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  DEAD 


THE  PAPYRUS  OF  ANI 


32. —  Vignetti 
Tlie  HM  of  the 
fold  Maat  (cont 
from  (-"late  31), ! 
ing  the  rest  o 
judges  of  the 
■  ■  1  four  corr 
ments,  the  two 
desses  of  Law, 
adoring  Osiris, 
Trial  of  the  Ci 
ence  (see  Plate  3 
Thothandthel-e 
of  Law.  (b) 
twenty-three  goi 
whom  arc  sevt 
assigned  various 
of  the  body. 

Text :  Chapter 
(continued)  and 
of  4i  (the  Assi 
t,on  of  I.imhs)  o 
liook  of  the  I  It  a 


CHAP.  CXXV    CONTINUED.       THE    NEGATIVE   CONFESSION 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  DEAD 


THE  PAPYRUS  OF  ANI 


CHAP.   CLV  CHAP.  CLVI  CHAP.  XXIX  B.      CHAP.  CLXVI       CHAP.  CLI 


CHAP.  CLI  cor^Tl^ 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  DEAD 


THE  PAPYRUS  OF  ANI 


wmmmwmmui 


BoLOirnmiminEiiiiii  m  iiiiniiiiijmniDDiin: 


CHAP,  ex        VIGNETTE 


CHAP.  CXLVIII 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  DEAD 


THE  PAPYRUS  OF  ANI 


CHAP,   CXLVIII 


ADORATION   OF  OSIRIS. 


CHAP.  CLXXXVi. 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  DEAD  THE  PAPYRUS  OF  ANI 


37. —  Vignettes:  {a)0 
Sekerwithinashrlne(ai 
by  Ani  and  his  wife, 
36).  (4)ThegoddessH: 
as  a  hippopotamus,  cro 
with  the  sun-disk  and  h 
before  her,  a  table  of 
ings ;  behind,  the  Mel 
Cow.  symbolizing  the 
goddess,  who  gazes 
from  the  mountain  of  A 
la,  at  the  foot  of  whi 
the  tomb. 

Text.  Chapters  14! 
186  of  the  Book  o 
Dead. 


CHAP.  CLXXXVI. 


^ 


