HE 
HH 


BERKELEY, CALIFORNIA 


LOANED BY THE TRUSTEES OF THE 


HENRY PIERCE LIBRARY 
SAN FRANCISCO 


BUBLISELERS SN OTe 


Messrs. Kecan Pav, TrencH, TRUBNER & Co., Lrp., beg to 
announce that they have still in stock a limited number of the 
larger edition of the hieroglyphic text and translation of the 
Theban Recension of the Book of the Dead, with the hiero- 
glyphic vocabulary by Dr. Waxiis Bupa, which appeared in 
three volumes under the title “ CHAprEeR oF CominG FortH 
BY Day,” late in 1897. 


Price for the Entire Work, £2 10s, 


VotvumE I. contains all the known Chapters of the Theban 
Recension of the Book of the Dead, printed in hieroglyphic 
type (pp. 1—517), and a description of the papyri in the British 
Museum from which they have been edited, and a list of 
Chapters, ete. (pp. i-xl.). This edition is the most complete 
which has hitherto been published. 


VotumeE II. contains a full vocabulary (pp. 1—386) to all the 
hieroglyphic texts of the Chapters of the Theban Recension of 
the Book of the Dead and to the supplementary Chapters 
from the Saite Recension which are given therewith in Volume 
I. The volume contains about 35,000 references, 


VotumeE IIT. contains :— 
Preface and list of Chapters (i.-xxxvi.). 
1. InrRopuCTION (pp. Xxxvii.-cciv.) :— 

Chap. I—The History of the Book of the Dead. This 
Chapter is accompanied by eighteen plates which illus- 
trate the paleeography of the various Recensions of the 
Book of the Dead from the Vth Dynasty to the Roman 
Period. 


VOLs 1. A 


Chap. — I1.— Osiris and the Resurrection. 

9 I11.—The Judgment of the Dead. 

5 TV.—The Elysian Fields or Heaven, With extracts 
from the Pyramid Texts. 

3 V.—The Magic of the Book of the Dead. 

PA V1I.—tThe Object and Contents of the Book of the Dead. 

. ViIl.—The Book of the Dead of Nesi-Khonsu, about 
B.C. 1000 (English translation). 

»  VItl—The Book of Breathings (English translation). 

v TX.—The Papyrus of Takhert-puru-abt (English 
translation). 


2, ENGLIsH TRANSLATION OF THE Book or THE DEAD 
(pp. 1—354). The volume also contains three scenes from the 
famous Papyrus of Ani representing the Judgment Scene, the 
Funeral Procession, and the Elysian Fields, which have been 
reproduced in full colours by Mr. W. Griggs, the eminent 
photo-lithographer. : 


BOOKS ON 
EGYPT AND CHALDAEA 


By A. EH. WALLIS BUDGH, M.A., Lrrr.D., D.Ltr. 


Keeper of the Egyptian and Assyrian Antiquities in 
the British Museum 


AND 


Ia, We KING? MAS 


Assistant in the Department of Egyptian and Assyrian Antiquities in 
the British Museum 


Crown 8vo, 3s. 6d. net each. 


Vol. I—Egyptian Religion: Egyptian Ideas of a Future 
Life. By E. A. Watiis Buper. 

x; Il.—Egyptian Magic. By E. A. Watiis Bupes. 

III.— Egyptian Language: Easy Lessons in Egyptian 

Hieroglyphics. By HE. A. Watuis Bupae. 

IV.—Babylonian Religion: Babylonian Religion and 

Mythology. By L. W. Kine. 
V.—Assyrian Language; Easy Lessons in the Cunei- 
form Inscriptions. By L. W. Kina. 

Vols. VI—VIII.—The Book of the Dead; An English 
Translation of the Theban Recension, with 
supplementary Chapters, Hymns, ete., and 
420 Vignettes which do not appear in the 
larger edition published in 1897, By EK. A. 
Wats Buper, 


” 


”? 


The above volumes are now ready, and will be followed by:— 

Vol. I[X.—Mesopotamian Magic; A Study of Babylonian 
Sorcery and Witchcraft. By L. W. Kine. 

X.—The Rosetta Stone. By E. A. Watts Bupau. 


” 


LONDON a 
KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER & CO., Lrp. 
PATERNOSTER Hovusr, CHARING Cross Roap 


1901 


Books on Egypt and Chaldaea 


Vout. VI. OF THE SERIES 


eC hee Ore Like DEAD 


ENGLISH TRANSLATION IN THREE VOLUMES 
Wierne 1 


CHAPTERS [.—LXIV. 


PUBLISHERS|INO@E 


~~ 


In the year 1894 Dr. Wallis Budge prepared for Messrs. Kegan 
Paul, Trench, Tribner & Co. an elementary work on the 
Kgyptian language, entitled “ First Steps in Egyptian,” and two 
years later the companion volume, “An Egyptian Reading 
Book,” with transliterations of all the texts printed in it, and 
a full vocabulary. The success of these works proved that 
they had helped to satisfy a want long felt by students of the 
Egyptian language, and as a similar want existed among 
students of the languages written im the cuneiform character, 
Mr. L. W. King, of the British Museum, prepared on the same 
lines as the two books mentioned above, an elementary work on 
the Assyrian and Babylonian languages (“First Steps in 
Assyrian”), which appeared in 1898. These works, however, 
dealt mainly with the philological branch of Egyptology and 
Assyriology, and it was impossible in the space allowed to 
explain much that needed explanation in the other branches of 
these subjects—that is to say, matters relating to the arche- 
ology, history, religion, etc., of the Egyptians, Assyrians, and 
Babylonians. In answer to the numerous requests which have 
been made, a series of short, popular handbooks on the most 
important branches of Egyptology and Assyriology have been 
prepared, and it is hoped that these will serve as introductions 
to the larger works on these subjects. The present is the sixth 
volume of the series, and the succeeding volumes will be 
published at short intervals, and at moderate prices. 


Books on Lgypt and Chaldaca 


THE 


mOOK OE Thine ir A) 


AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION OF THE CHAPTERS, 
HYMNS, ETC. OF THE THEBAN RECENSION, 
WITH INTRODUCTION, NOTES, ETC. 


BY 
Peek WALLIS “BUDGE, -M.A., Lirt.D:,. D.Lrr. 


KEEPER OF THE EGYPTIAN AND ASSYRIAN ANT 


CHICAGO : 
‘bake OPEN COURT: PUBLISHING CO. Lp. 


LONDON Property of 


KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER & CBSK 


1901 
Please return to 


Graduate Theological 
Union Library 


—2 LONDON? 
PRINTED BY GILBERT AND RIVINGTON, 
ST. JOHN’S HOUSE, CLERKENWELL, 


Pie E, PeAGE: 


Tue translations of the Egyptian hymns and religious 
texts printed in this and the two following volumes 
form a representative collection of the various composi- 
tions which the Egyptians inscribed upon the walls of 
tombs and sarcophagi, coffins and funeral stelae, papyri 
and amulets, etc., in order to ensure the well-being of 
their dead in the world beyond the grave. They have 
been translated from papyri and other documents which 
were found chiefly at Thebes, and, taken together, they 
are generally known as the Theban Recension of the 
Book of the Dead, that is to say, the Recension of the 
great national funeral work which was copied by the 
scribes for themselves and for Hgyptian kings and 
queens, princes and nobles, gentle and simple, rich and 
poor, from about B.c. 1600 to B.c. 900. These transla- 
tions first appeared in the third volume of my work on 
the Book of the Dead, which was published under the 
title of ‘The Chapters of Coming Forth by Day,” 
at the end of the year 1897, where they seemed to 
be a necessary accompaniment to the edition of the 
hieroglyphic texts of the Theban Recension and the 
VOL. I. a 


sere a? 


u PREFACE 


hieroglyphic vocabulary thereto. The demand for that 
bulky and comparatively expensive work proved that it 
filled a want, but soon after its appearance frequent 
requests were made that the English translation might 
be issued in a smaller and handier form. In answer to 
these requests, Messrs. Kegan Paul, Trench, Triibner, 
and Co. decided to publish the complete English 
translation of the Book of the Dead in their series of 
books on Egypt and Chaldaea, together with such 
introductory matter, index, etc., as are necessary to 
make this edition of use to the general reader. 

The translation given in the present series is, how- 
ever, no mere reprint, for it has been carefully revised 
and compared with the original texts, and many brief 
explanatory notes have been added ; and, with the view 
of placing in the hands of the reader as complete an 
edition as possible, more than four hundred vignettes, 
taken from the best papyri, have been reproduced in 
the volumes of the present edition at the heads of the 
Chapters, the general contents of which the aneient 
Egyptian scribes and artists intended them to illustrate. 
The greater number of these have been specially drawn 
or traced for this purpose, and they faithfully represent 
the originals in form and outline; to reproduce the 
colours of the originals was out of the question, for the 
cost of coloured illustrations would have placed this 
book beyond the reach of the general public. 

Many of the ideas and beliefs embodied in the texts 
here translated are coeval with Egyptian civilization, 


PREFACE il 


and the actual forms of some of the most interesting of 
these are identical with those which we now know to have 
existed in the Vth and VIth Dynasties, about B.c. 3500. 
On the other hand, many of them date from the pre- 
dynastic period, and, in the chapter on the History of 
the Book of the Dead, which forms part of the Intro- 
duction to the present edition, an attempt has been 
made to show how some of the religious views of the 
north-east African race, which formed the main 
indigenous substratum of the dynastic Hgyptians, 
found their way into the Book of the Dead and 
maintained their position there. 
The greater number of the translations here given 
belong to the group to which the Egyptians gave the 
name, “Chapters of Coming Forth by Day,” and the 
remainder are introductory hymns, supplementary 
extracts from ancient cognate works, rubrics, etc., 
which were intended to be used as words of power by 
the deceased in the underworld. The papyri and 
other originals which. have been selected as authorities 
_ are the best now known, and they have been chosen 
with the view of illustrating the development of the 
Theban Recension and the changes which took place in 
it during the various periods of its history. Since no 
papyrus contains all the Chapters and Vignettes of 
this Recension, and no two papyri agree either in 
respect of contents or arrangement of the Chapters, 
and the critical value of every text in a papyrus is not 
always the same, it follows that a complete edition of 


lV PREFACE 


‘all the known Chapters of the Theban Recension would 
be impossible unless recourse were had to several 
papyri. Since the year 1886, in which M. Naville’s 
Das Todtenbuch der Aegypter appeared, several 
extremely important papyri of the Book of the Dead 
have been discovered, and it is now possible to add 
considerably to the number of Chapters of the Theban 
Recension which he published. Thus the Papyrus of 
Ani supplies us with Introductions to Chapters XVIII. 
and CXXY., and hymns to Ra and Osiris, and texts 
referring to the Judgment Scene, and all of these are 
new; besides, we gain a complete, though short, 
version of Chapter CLXXV. And from the Papyrus 
of Nu, which is the oldest of the illuminated papyri 
known, we have obtained about twenty Chapters of the 
Theban Recension, which were unknown until 1897, 
and several which have, up to the present, been only 
known to exist in single manuscripts. Use has there- 
fore been made of several papyri, and as a result 
translations of about one hundred and sixty Chapters, 
not including different versions, Hymns, and Rubrics, 
are given in the present edition. ‘Translation of six- 
teen Chapters of the Saite Recension have also been 
added, both because they form good specimens of the 
religious compositions of the later period of Egyptian 
history, and illustrate some curious beliefs, and because, 
having adopted the numbering of the Chapters em- 
ployed by Lepsius, they were needed to make the 
numbering of the Chapters in this edition consecutive. 


PREFACE Vv 


The translation has been made as literal as possible, 
my aim being to let the reader judge the contents of 
the Theban Recension of the Book of the Dead for 
himself; the notes are short, and it was thought to be 
unnecessary to encumber the pages of a book which is 
intended for popular use with voluminous disquisitions 
and references. The reader who needs to consult other 
works on the subject will find a tolerably full Biblio- 
eraphy to the printed literature of the Book of the 
Dead in my Papyrus of Ani, London, 1895, pp. 371 ff. 

It has been the fashion during the last few years 
among certain writers on Egyptology to decry the Book 
of the Dead, and to announce as a great discovery 
that the hieroglyphic and hieratic texts thereof are cor- 
rupt; but that several passages of the work are hope- 
lessly corrupt has been well known to Egyptolgists for 
the last fifty years, and they have never concealed the 
fact that they could not translate them. Moreover, 
the Egyptian scribes informed their readers by the 
frequent use of the words “ki tchet,” i.e., “otherwise 
said,” that they themselves did not know which variants 
represented the correct readings, and recent investiga- 
tions have proved that the scribes and sages of the XIXth 
Dynasty had as much difficulty as we have in read- 
ing certain hieratic signs which were written during 
the Early Empire, and were as undecided as we are 
about the true transcription of them. The text of every 
great national religious composition which is handed 
down first by oral tradition, and secondly by copies 


vi PREFACE 


which are multiplied by professional scribes and others, 
is bound to become corrupt in places; this result is 
due partly to carelessness of the copyists, and partly 
to their inability to understand the allusions and the 
obscure words which occur in them. But the history 
of the religious literatures of the world shows that when 
a series of compositions has once attained to the position 
of a recognized national religious work, the corruptions 
in the text thereof do not in any way affect the minds 
of their orthodox readers in the general credibility of 
the passages in which they occur. And the Book of the 
Dead forms no exception to this rule, for the work, 
which was very old even in the reign of Semti, a king 
of the First Dynasty, and was, moreover, so long at 
that time as to need abbreviation, was copied and re- 
copied, and added to by one generation after another 
for a period of nearly 5000 years; and the pious 
Egyptian, whether king or ploughman, queen or maid- 
servant, lived with the teaching of the Book of the 
Dead before his eyes, and he was buried according to 
its directions, and he based his hope of everlasting life 
and happiness upon the efficacy of its hymns and 
prayers, and words of power. By him its Chapters 
were not regarded as materials for grammatical exer- 
cises, but as all-powerful guides along the road which, 
passing through death and the grave, led into the realms 
of light and life, and into the presence of the divine 
being Osiris, the conqueror of death, who made men 
and women “to be born again.” ‘The more the Book of 


PREFACE vii 


the Dead is read and examined, the better chance there 
is of its difficult allusions being explained, and its dark 
passages made clear, and this much to be desired result 
can only be brought about by the study, and not by the 
condemnation, of its texts. 

In the Introduction to the present translation 
Chapters are added on the literary history of the Book 
of the Dead, on the doctrines of Osiris, and of the 
Judgment and Resurrection, and on the Object and 
Contents of the Book of the Dead. The limits, how- 
ever, of this work made it impossible to include within 
it the chapter on the Magic of the Book of the Dead 
which appeared in the edition of 1897, and the eighteen 
plates which illustrated the paleography of the various 
Recensions from about B.c. 3500 to A.p. 200, and the 
lengthy extracts from the Pyramid Texts which describe 
the abode and occupations of the beatified in the 
Elysian Fields. The renderings of the funeral texts 
written for Nesi-Khonsu, Kerasher, and Takhert-p-uru- 
abt, appended to the third volume will, it is hoped, 
enable the reader to make a comparison of the beliefs 
of the Egyptians in the early and later periods of their 
history. 


E. A. Watuis Bupae. 


Lonpon, 
June 1st, 1901. 


CONTENTS OF VOLUME JI. 


PAGE 
PREFACE . : : , - : - : ; : i 
INTRODUCTION :— 
1. Toe History or THE Book or THE Drap xvil 
2. OSIRIS, THE GOD OF JUDGMENT, THE RESURRECTION, 
ImMorTALITY, THE ELYsSIAN FIELDS, ETC. Iii 
3. Tur Opsect AND CoNTENTS OF THE BooKk oF THE 
Drap . : < : . : : lxxxiv 
Hymw To RA at risinc. From fie Papyrus of Ani. 
With vignette ; : : : 3 
Hymn to RA at risina. From the Papyrus of Qenna if 
Hymw to RA at risine. From the Papyrus of Qenna 10 
Hymn to RX at risinc. Fromthe Papyrus of Hu-nefer 12 
Hymw ro RA av pristine. From the Papyrus of Nekht 15 
Hymn to Osiris Un-NEFER. From the Papyrus of Ani. 18 
TEXTS RELATING TO THE JUDGMENT. From the Papyrus 
of Ani. With vignettes : : : . 25—380 
CHAP. 

J.—HERE BEGIN THE CHAPTERS OF ComING ForRTH BY 
Day. From the Papyrus of Ani. With vig- 
nettes . : ; : é ‘ ‘ : 5 nate) 

Iz.—OF MAKING THE SAHU TO ENTER INTO THE UNDER- 
WORLD ON THE DAY OF THE FUNERAL. From 
the Papyrus of Nekhtu-Amen. With vignette 47 
II.—OF comMING FORTH BY DAY AND OF LIVING AFTER 
DEATH. From the Papyrus of ANtr 49 
TIT.—ANorHER CHAPTER LIKE UNTO THE PRECEDING. eon 
the Papyrus of Nu ; : : : : = 00 


xX CONTENTS OF VOLUME I. 


CHAP. 
IV.—OF PASSING OVER THE CELESTIAL ROAD OF RE- 


stavu. From the Papyrus of Nu : : 
V.—OF NOT LETTING THE DECEASED DO WORK IN THE 
UNDERWORLD. From the Papyrus of Nebseni. 
With vignette. C ; : : : ; 
VI.—OF MAKING THE SHABTI FIGURE TO DO WORK, 
From the Papyrus of Nebseni. With vignette. 
VII.—OF PASSING OVER THE ABOMINABLE BACK OF APEP. 
From the Papyrus of Nu. With vignette ‘ 
VITI.—Or passine THROUGH AMENTET. From the Papyrus 
of Ani. With vignette . : 5 : : 
LX.—OF CoMING FORTH BY DAY HAVING PASSED THROUGH 
rue Amaunet. From the Papyrus of Ani. 
With vignette. : : - - : : 
X.—OF COMING FORTH BY DAY AGAINST ENEMIES IN 
THE UNDERWORLD. From the Papyrus of Ani. 


With vignette. 3 é c : ‘ : 
XJ.—OF COMING FORTH AGAINST ENEMIES IN THE UNDER- 
worLp. From the Papyrus of Nu. : : 
XII.—Or GOING INTO AND OF COMING FORTH FROM THE 
UNDERWORLD. From the Papyrus of Nu . : 


XI1I.—Or ENTERING INTO AND OF COMING FORTH FROM THE 
UNDERWORLD. From the Papyrus of Nebseni . 
XIV.—OFr PUTTING AN END TO SHAME IN THE HEART OF 
THE Gop. From the Papyrus of Mes-em-neter. 
XV.—(1) A Hymn oF Praise To RA av Risine. From 
the Papyrus of Ani. With vignette . : 

(2) Hymn anv Lirany to Osiris. From the 


Papyrus of Ani. With vignette : : : 
(3) Hymn or Praise To Ra ar pristine. From 
the Papyrus of Ani, With vignettes - : 
(4) Hymy ro Ri ar serrine. From the Papyrus 
of Mut-hetep. With vignette . 5 : 


(5) Hymn ro Ra av serrine. From the Papyrus 
of Nekhtu-Amen. With vignette . . f 
(6) Hymn ro RA ar sertinc. From a Papyrus 
at Dublin. : : : : ; : 4 


PAGE 


53 


54 


83 


86 


CONTENTS OF VOLUME I. 


CHAP, 


XVI.—[Vignettes of Chapter XV. ] 

XVII.—THE PRAISES AND GLORIFYINGS OF COMING OUT 
FROM AND OF GOING INTO THE GLORIOUS 
UNDERWORLD. From the Papyri of Nebseni 
and Ani. With vignettes . ‘ 

XVITI.—Inrropuction. From the Papyrus of ae 
With vignettes. . : 
[Appanems TO GODS OF eet eos 
the Papyrus of Ani. With vignettes. 

XIX.—Or THE CHAPLET oF Victory. From the 
Papyrus of Auf-ankh . : s : : 

XX.—[Without title], From the Papyrus of 
Nebseni : ‘ r ‘ - . : 

XXIJI.—OF GIVING A MOUTH TO THE DECEASED. From 
the Papyrus of Nu. With vignette 

XXII.—OF GIVING A MOUTH TO THE DECEASED. From 
the Papyrus of Nu. With vignette . 

XXIII.—Or openING THE MOUTH OF THE DECEASED. 
From the Papyrus of Ani, With vignettes 

XXIV.—OF BRINGING CHARMS TO THE DECEASED. From 
the Papyrus of Ani. With vignette . 

XXV.—OF MAKING A MAN TO POSSESS MEMORY IN 
THE UNDERWORLD. From ,the Papyrus of 
Nu. With vignette . * : : : 

XXVI.—-OF GIVING A HEART TO THE DECEASED IN 
THE UNDERWORLD. From the Papyrus of 
Ani. With vignette . : : ; ‘ 

XXVII.—OFr Not LETTING THE HEART OF THE DECEASED 
BE TAKEN FROM HIM IN THE UNDERWORLD. 
From the Papyrus of Ani. With vignette. 

XXVIII.—Or Not LETTING THE HEART OF THE DECEASED 
BE TAKEN EROM HIM IN THE UNDERWORLD. 
From the Papyrus of Nu. With vignette . 

XXIXA. —OF NOT LETTING THE HEART OF THE DE- 
CEASED BE TAKEN FROM HIM IN THE UNDER- 
wortp. Erom the Papyrus of Ani, With 
vignette : . : : ; 


PAGE 


88 


130 


131 


132 


134 


136 


139 


141 


143 


Xil CONTENTS OF VOLUME I. 


CHAP, 
XXIXB.—OF NOT ALLOWING THE HEART OF THE DE- 


CEASED TO BE TAKEN FROM HIM IN THE 
UNDERWORLD. From the Papyrus of 


Amen-hetep. With vignette . : : 
XXIXc.—A HEART OF CARNELIAN. From the Papyrus 
of Ani. With vignette. : : 


XXX.—OF NOT LETTING THE HEART OF THE -DE- 
CEASED BE DRIVEN AWAY FROM HIM IN 
THE UNDERWORLD. From the Papyrus 
of Auf-ankh. With vignette . : : 
XXXaA.—-OF NOT LETTING THE HEART OF THE DE- 
CEASED BE DRIVEN AWAY FROM HIM IN 
THE UNDERWORLD. From the Papyrus 
of Nu. With vignette  . : : : 
XXXB.—OF NOT LETTING THE HEART OF THE DE- 
CEASED BE DRIVEN AWAY FROM HIM IN 
THE UNDERWORLD. From the Papyrus of 
Ani. With vignette . ¢ : c : 
XXXI.—OF BEATING BACK THE CROCODILE THAT 
COMETH TO CARRY OFF THE CHARM. From 

the Papyrus of Nu. With vignette . 
XXXII.—Or BEATING BACK THE CROCODILE THAT 
COMETH TO CARRY OFF THE CHARM. From 


the Papyrus of Auf-ankh. . . . 
XXXIII.—Or reputstna sERPENTS. From the Papyrus 
of Nu. With vignette. : : : 


XXXIV.—OF NOT LETTING THE DECEASED BE BITTEN 
BY SNAKES. From the Papyrus of Nu. 

With vignette . c : ; : ; 

XXX V.—OF NOT LETTING THE DECEASED BE DEVOURED 
BY SERPENTS. From the Papyrus of Nu. 

With vignette . : : é : : 
XXXVI.—OFr privine away ApsHailTt. From the 
Papyrus of Nu. With vignette : : 
XXXVII.—Or prRIVING BACK THE MERTI GODDESSES. 
From the Papyrus of Nu. With vig- 

nette . , - ~ : A , A 


PAGE 


144 


145 


146 


147 


149 


CONTENTS OF VOLUME I. 


XXXVIUa—Or LIVING BY AIR IN THE UNDERWORLD. 
From the Papyrus of Nebseni. With 
vignette , 3 : : 

XXXVIIIp.—OF LIVING BY AIR IN THE UNDERWORLD. 
From the Papyrus of Nu. With vig- 
nette 5 A 3 4 ; 

XXXIX.—OF DRIVING BACK THE SERPENT REREK. 
From the Papyrus of Mes-em-neter. 
With vignette : : : 
XL.—OF DRIVING BACK THE EATER OF THE Ass. 
From the Papyri of Ra and Nu. With 
vignette . . : 5 : : 
XLI.—OFr DRIVING AWAY: THE SLAUGHTERINGS 
WHICH ARE PERFORMED IN THE UNDER- 
WoRLD. From the Papyrus of Nebseni. 
With vignette. : : . 
XLII.—OFr DRIVING BACK THE SLAUGHTERINGS WHICH 
ARE PERFORMEDIN SUTEN-HENEN. From 
the Papyrus of Nu. With vignette 
XLIIL.—Or nor Lerrine THE HEAD OF THE DECEASED 
BE CUT OFF IN THE UNDERWORLD. From 
the Papyrus of Ani. With vignette 
XLIV.—OF NOT DYING A SECOND TIME IN THE 
UNDERWORLD. From the Papyrus of 
Ani. With vignette : : 
XLV.—OF NOT SUFFERING CORRUPTION IN THE 
UNDERWORLD. From the Papyrus of 
Ani. With vignette : : 
XLVI.—Or Nor PERISHING AND OF BECOMING ALIVE 
INTHE UNDERWORLD. From the Papyrus 
of Ani. With vignette . : : 
XLVII.-—Or not ALLOWING THE SEAT AND THRONE 
TO BE TAKEN AWAY IN THE UNDERWORLD. 
From the Papyri of Nu and Nebseni. 
With vignette. : : : 
XLVIII.—[See Chapter X.] 
XLIX.—[See Chapter XI.] 


Xill 


PAGE 


164 


167 


170 


173 


184 


XIV CONTENTS OF VOLUME I. 


CHAP. PAGE 
L.A.—OF NOT ENTERING IN UNTO THE BLOCK OF THE 


cop. From the Papyrus of Nebseni. With 

vignette . - : : : : : . 190 
L.8.—OF NOT ENTERING IN UNTO THE BLOCK OF THE 

Gop. From the Papyrus of Nu. With 

vignette . < : : é : : 5S 
LI.—OFr Not MARCHING TO BE OVERTHROWN IN THE 

UNDERWORLD. From the Papyrus of Nu. 


With vignette . : : - : : = ee 
LIJ.—Or Nor EATING FILTH IN THE UNDERWORLD. 
From the Papyrus of Nu. With vignette . 193 


LIII.—OF not EATING FILTH AND OF NOT DRINKING FOUL 
WATER IN THE UNDERWORLD. From _ the 

Papyrus of Nu. : é ‘ ; , . 195 

LIV.—OF GIVING AIR TO THE DECEASED IN THE 

UNDERWORLD. From the Papyrus of Nu. 

With vignette . , : : : ; 

LV.—OF GIVING AIR IN THE UNDERWORLD. From the 

Papyrus of Nu. With vignette. E . 198 
LVI.—OF SNUFFING THE AIR AMONG THE WATERS IN 
THE UNDERWORLD. From the Papyrus of Nu. 

With vignette . . ; ; : : . 199 
LVII.—OF sNUFFING THE AIR, AND OF HAVING MASTERY 
OVER THE WATERS IN THE UNDERWORLD. 

From the Papyrus of Nu. With vignette . 200 
LVIII.—OF BREATHING THE AIR AND OF HAVING 
DOMINION OVER THE WATER IN THE UNDER- 
wortp. From the Papyrus of Ani. With 

vignette . : : ‘ é : : . 202 
LIX.—OF SNUFFING THE AIR AND OF HAVING DOMINION 
OVER THE WATER IN THE UNDERWORLD. From 


197 


the Papyrus of Ani. With vignette . . 204 
LX.—Ayorner Cuarrer. From the Papyrus of Auf- 
ankh. With vignette . : : : . 205 


LXI.—OF NoT LETTING THE SOUL OF A MAN BE TAKEN 
FROM HIM IN THE UNDERWORLD. From the 
Papyrus of Ani. With vignette .  . . 206 


CONTENTS OF VOLUME I. 


CHAP, 
LXII.—Or DRINKING WATER IN THE _ UNDERWORLD. 


From the Papyrus of Nebseni. With 

vignette F : : ; : 

LXIITA.—OF DRINKING WATER AND OF NOT BEING BURNT. 

From the Papyrus of Nu. With vignette . 

LXIIIs.—Or nor BEING SCALDED WITH WATER. From 
the Papyrus of Nu. With vignette 

LXIV.—(1) OF coming FoRTH BY DAY IN THE UNDER- 

world. From the Papyrus of Nebseni. 

With vignette : : : : 

LXIV.—(2) OF KNowine THE “CHAPTERS OF COMING 

ForTH BY DAY” IN A SINGLE CHAPTER. 

From the Papyrus of Nu. With vignette . 


PAGE 


210 


218 


INTRODUCTION 


THE HISTORY OF THE BOOK OF THE DEAD. 


THE early history of the great collection of religious 
texts which has now become well known throughout 
the world by the names “Das Todtenbuch,” ‘“ Das 
Aegyptische Todtenbuch,” “Le Livre des Morts,” 
“Rituel Funéraire,” “Il Libro dei funerali degli 
antichi Kgiziani,’ and “The Book of the Dead,” is 
shrouded in the mists of remote antiquity, and up to 
the present no evidence has been forthcoming which 
will enable us to formulate it in an accurate manner. 
The very title “Book of the Dead” is unsatisfactory, 
for it does not in any way descfibe the contents of the 
mass of religious texts, hymns, litanies, etc., which are 
now best known by that name, and it is no rendering 
whatever of their ancient Egyptian title Rrvu NU 


> 10 G2 : 
PERT EM HRU ! wech a eel Se (reese, 
“Chapters of diciae Forth by Day.” The name 


“Book of the Dead” is, however, more satisfactory 

than that of “Ritual of the Dead,’ or “ Funeral 

Ritual,” for only a very small section of it can be 

rightly described as of a ritual character, whilst the 
VOL. I. b 


XVill INTRODUCTION 


whole collection of compositions does certainly refer to 
the dead and to what happens to the dead in the world 
beyond the grave. 

Of the home and origin also of the Book of the 
Dead but little can be said. Now that so many of 
the pre-dynastic graves of Keypt have been excavated, 
and their contents have been so fully described and 
discussed, we find no evidence forthcoming that would 
justify us in assuming that the aboriginal inhabitants 
of the country possessed any collection of religious 
texts which might be regarded as the original work 
from which, by interpolations and additions, the Re- 
censions of the Book of the Dead now known could 
have descended, or even that they made use of any 
collection of religious texts at the burial of the dead. 
That there are references in the various Recensions to 
the funeral customs of the aborigines of Egypt is fairly 
certain, and it is evident from the uniform manner in 
which the dead were laid in their graves in the earliest 
pre-dynastic times that the aborigines possessed tolerably 
well defined general ideas about the future life, but 
we cannot regard them as the authors even of the 
earliest Recension of the Book of the Dead, because 
that work presupposes the existence of ideas which the 
aboriginals did not possess, and refers to an elaborate 
system of sepulture which they never practised. 
Whether we regard the aborigines of Egypt as of 
Libyan origin or not it is certain that they employed a 
system of sepulture which, in its earliest forms, was 


INTRODUCTION X1X 


quite different from that in use among their latest pre- 
dynastic and their earliest dynastic descendants. If 
the known facts be examined it is difficult not to arrive 
at the conclusion that many of the beliefs found in the 
Book of the Dead were either voluntarily borrowed 
from some nation without, or were introduced into 
Egypt by some conquering immigrants who made their 
way into the country from Asia, either by way of the 
Red Sea or across the Arabian peninsula; that they 
were brought into Egypt by new-comers seems most 
probable, Who those new-comers were or where they 
came from cannot be definitely said at present, but 
there are good grounds for thinking that they first 
adopted certain of the general customs which they 
found in use among the dwellers on the Nile, and then 
modified them, either to suit the religious texts with 
which they were acquainted, or their own individual 
views which they evolved after they had arrived in 
Egypt. The excavation of pre-dynastic cemeteries in 
Egypt has revealed the fact that its aboriginal or pre- 
dynastic inhabitants disposed of their dead by burial 
and by burning; the bodies which were buried were 
either dismembered or cut up into a considerable 
number of pieces, or buried whole. Bodies buried 
whole were laid on their left sides with their heads to 
the south, and were sometimes laid in the skins of 
gazelles and sometimes in grass mats; no attempt 
was made to mummify them in the strict sense of the 
term, This seems to be the oldest method of burial in 


XX INTRODUCTION 


the Nile Valley. The dismembering or cutting up of 
the body into a number of pieces was due probably 
both to a wish to economize space, and to prevent the 
spirit of the deceased from returning to his old village ; 
in such eases the head is separated from the body, and 
the limbs are laid close together. Chronologically, the 
disposal of the dead by burning comes next; usually 
the bodies were only partially burnt, and afterwards 
the skull and the bones were thrown into a compara- 
tively shallow pit, care being, however, taken to keep 
those of the hands and feet together. Speaking 
generally, these two classes of burials are well defined, 
and the cemeteries in which each class is found are 
usually quite separate and distinct, lying ordinarily some 
distance apart. Whether we are to distinguish two 
distinct peoples in those who buried the bodies of their 
dead whole, and in those who burnt them first and buried 
their remains, it is almost too early to decide, but there 
is abundant evidence to show that both of these classes 
of the inhabitants of Egypt had many funeral customs 
incommon. They both used covered pits for tombs, 
both buried their dead in the valleys, both oriented 
the dead in the same direction, and both made funeral 
offerings to the dead. The offerings prove beyond all 
doubt that both those who buried and those who burnt 
their dead held definite views about the future life, and 
these can hardly have existed in their minds without 
some perception, however dim, of a divine power being 
there also. It is idle to speculate on the nature of 


INTRODUCTION XX1 


such a perception with our present limited knowledge, 
but it must not be forgotten that the widespread 
custom of burying the dead with the head to the south, 
and the presence of funeral offerings, indicate the 
existence of religious convictions which are not of a 
low order, and are not common among savage or semi- 
barbarous tribes. 

It has been said above that the people who buried 
their dead whole made no attempt to mummify the 
bodies in the strict sense of the term, still, as Dr. 
Fouquet found traces of bitumen in some of the 
skeletons to which he devoted an exhaustive examina- 
tion, and as many bodies have been found wrapped in 
skins of animals, and grass mats, and even rough 
cloths, we may rightly assume that they would have 
taken far more elaborate precautions to preserve their 
dead had they possessed the necessary knowledge. 
These early inhabitants of Kgypt embalmed their 
dead either because they wished to keep their material 
bodies with them upon earth, or because they believed 
that the future welfare of the departed depended in 
some way upon the preservation of the bodies which 
they had left behind them upon earth. Whatever the 
motive, it is quite certain that it must have been a 
very powerful one, for the custom of preserving the 
dead by one means or another lasted in Egypt without 
a break from the earliest pre-dynastic times almost 
down to the conquest of the country by the Arabs, 
about A.D. 640. 


XX11 INTRODUCTION 


Meanwhile, however, we may note that the graves of 
those who were buried whole, and of those who were 
burnt, or dismembered, contain no inscriptions, and it 
is evident that the habit of writing religious texts upon 
the objects laid in the tombs, a habit which became 
universal in the times of the historical Egyptians, was 
not yet in existence. Still, it is impossible to think 
that people who, clearly, believed in a future life, and 
who tried to preserve the bodies of their dead from 
religious motives, would bury their beloved friends and 
relatives without uttering some pious wish for their 
welfare in the world beyond the grave, or causing the 
priest of the community to recite some magical charm 
or formula, or repeat certain incantations, which had 
been composed for such occasions, on their behalf. 
It is more than probable that, if prayers or formulae 
were recited at the time of burial, the recital was 
accompanied by the performance of certain ceremonies, 
which must have partaken of a magical character ; 
both prayers and ceremonies must have been traditional, 
and were, no doubt, primarily designed to protect the 
dead from the attacks of wild animals, damp-rot, dry- 
rot, and decay. Now although we may not regard a 
collection of such funeral prayers, however large, as 
the earliest Recension of the Book of the Dead, there 
is little doubt that many of the formulae found in the 
Heliopolitan Recension of the Book of the Dead, which 
was in use during the [Vth and Vth Dynasties, date 
from a very early pre-dynastic period, and that they are 


INTRODUCTION XX1il 


as old as, or older, than the civilization of the historic 
Egyptians and their immediate predecessors. ‘Such 
formule are directed against snakes and scorpions, and 
other noxious reptiles, and the forms in which they 
were written by the scribes about B.c. 3500, and the 
mistakes which occur in them, prove that the copyists 
were dealing with texts that were at that remote time 
so old as to be unintelligible in many passages, and 
that they copied many of them without understanding 
them. In any case such formulae date from a period 
when the banks of the Nile were overrun by wild 
beasts, and when they formed the home of creatures of 
all kinds which were hostile to man, and which the 
early dwellers on the Nile sought to cajole or frighten 
away from their dead; indeed, there is little doubt 
that before the forests which lined the river banks 
were cut down for fuel Egypt must have resembled in 
many respects certain sections of the Nile Valley much 
further south, and that river monsters of all kinds, and 
amphibious beasts which are only now to be found on 
the upper reaches of the Blue Nile and near the Great 
Lakes, lived happily in the neighbourhood of Memphis, 
and even farther to the north. 

Towards the close of the period when the bodies of 
the dead were burnt, or dismembered, the objects found 
in the graves vary in character considerably from those 
which occur in the graves wherein the bodies are 
buried whole, and whereas in the older graves weapons 
of flint occur in abundance, and stone jars and vases 


XXIV INTRODUCTION 


are rare, in the later flint weapons are the exceptions, 
the hard stone vases become more numerous, and 
objects in metal are found in comparative abundance. 
To what cause these changes are due cannot exactly 
be said, but the presence of bronze and other metal 
objects most probably indicates the appearance of some 
foreign influence in the Valley of the Nile, and that 
that influence proceeded from immigrants is tolerably 
certain. Whether these immigrants belonged remotely 
to a Semitic stock, or whether they were descendants of 
a people akin to the nation which is now by common 
- consent called Sumerian, are questions impossible to 
answer at present; for, while the presence in the 
earliest hieroglyphic inscriptions of grammatical usages, 
and verbal forms, and idioms, and pronouns which are 
certainly identical with many of those in use in all the 
Semitic dialects indicates Semitic influence, or kinship 
with Semitic peoples to a considerable degree, the 
religious beliefs of the pre-dynastic and early dynastic 
Egyptians have few parallels with those of the Semitic 
peoples of antiquity known to us. But, whether the 
immigrants were of Semitic origin or not, they seem to 
have come originally from the Hast, and, whether by 
force of arms or otherwise, they certainly effected a 
permanent settlement in the Nile Valley; a people 
armed with metal weapons conquered those who relied 
upon weapons of flint and stone, and having made 
themselves masters of the country these men ruled it 
according to their own ideas and methods, as far as its 


INTRODUCTION XXV 


climate and natural conditions permitted. Conquest 
was followed by intermarriage, which was an absolute 
necessity if the immigrants came from the Hast and 
wished their descendants to abide in the land, and thus 
it comes to pass that the historic Egyptians are the 
descendants of an indigenous north-east African people, 
and of immigrants from the Kast, who having settled in 
Egypt were gradually absorbed into the native popu- 
lations. It is easy to see that the debt which the . 
indigenous peoples of Hgypt owed to the new-comers 
from the East is very considerable, for they learned 
from them the art of working in metals (although they 
continued to make use of flint weapons, i.e., knives, 
axe-heads, spear-heads, arrow-heads, scrapers, etc., 
without a break down to the time of the dynastic 
Egyptians), and the art of writing. M. de Morgan 
declares that the knowledge of [working in] bronze is 
of Asiatic origin, and he thinks that the art of brick- 
making was introduced into Egypt from Mesopotamia, 
where it was, as we learn from the ruins of early 
Sumerian cities, extensively practised, with many other 
things which he duly specifies. 

With the art of writing the new-comers in Egypt un- 
doubtedly brought certain religious beliefs, and funeral 
customs, and literature, and gradually the system of 
burial which was universal in Egypt up to the time of 
their arrival in the country became completely changed. 


1 Ethnographie Préhis'orique, p. 21 ff. 


XXVI1 INTRODUCTION 


The covered pits and troughs which served for graves, 
and which were dug almost anywhere on the banks of the 
river, were replaced by crude brick buildings contain- 
ing one or more chambers; graves were no longer dug 
in the valley but in the hill sides; dead bodies were 
neither burnt nor dismembered, and the head was not 
separated from the body; bandages systematically 
wound round the body took the place of skins of 
animals and grass mats and rough cloth wrappings ; 
and dead bodies were laid on their backs in coffins, 
instead of being bent up and laid on their side on the 
ground. The change in the character of the offerings 
and other objects found in the graves at this period 
was no less marked, for pottery made on a wheel took 
the place of that made by hand, and maces and more 
formidable weapons appeared, together with a large 
number of various kinds of amulets of a new class. It 
is, unfortunately, impossible to assign a date to this 
period of change, and it cannot be said how long it 
lasted, but it is certain that at this time both the 
indigenous peoples and the new-comers modified their 
burial customs, and that the foundations of the sepul- 
chral customs and of the system of mummification 
which were universal among the historical Egyptians 
were then laid. The indigenous peoples readily saw 
the advantage of brick-built tombs and of the other 
improvements which were introduced by the new- 
comers, and gradually adopted them, especially as they 
tended to the preservation of the natural body, and 


INTRODUCTION XXVil 


were beneficial for the welfare of the soul; but the 
changes introduced by the new-comers were of a radical 
character, and the adoption of them by the indigenous 
peoples of Egypt indicates a complete change in what 
may be described as the fundamentals of their belief. 
In fact they abandoned not only the custom of dis- 
membering and burning the body, but the half savage 
views and beliefs which led them to do such things 
also, and little by little they put in their place the 
doctrine of the resurrection of man, which was in turn 
based upon the belief that the god-man and king 


' 


Osiris had suffered death and mutilation, and had been - 


embalmed, and that his sisters Isis and Nephthys had 
provided him with a series of amulets which protected 
him from all harm in the world beyond the grave, and 
had recited a series of magical formulae which gave 
him everlasting life; in other words, they embraced the 
most important of all the beliefs which are found in 
the Book of the Dead. The period of this change is, 
in the writer’s opinion, the period of the introduction 
into Kgypt of many of the religious and funeral com- 
positions which are now known by the name of “ Book 
of the Dead.” Whether the primitive form of the 
doctrine of Osiris included the view that his body was 
hacked to pieces after death and his head severed 
from it is not known, but it is quite certain that many 
influential people in Egypt objected to the decapitation 
of the dead, and their objection found expression in the 


XLIlIrd Chapter of the Book of the Dead, which, 


XXV1l1 INTRODUCTION 


according to its title, provides expressly that “the 
head of a man shall not be cut off in the under- 
world.” ‘The text of this remarkable Chapter is of 
great interest; and reads, ““I am the Great One, the 
“son of the Great One; I am Fire, the son of 
“Fire, to whom was given his head after it had been 
“cut off. The head of Osiris was not taken away from 
“him, let not the head of (here follows the name of the 
“deceased, who is also called Osiris) be taken away 
“from him. I have knit myself together; I have 
“made myself whole and complete; I have renewed 
“my youth; Iam Osiris, the lord of eternity.” The 
title of this Chapter is definite enough, but the text 
seems to indicate that for a man to be certain of 
possession of his head in the next world it was 
necessary to have it first removed from his body after 
death, and then rejoined to it. The historic Egyptians 
seem to have abandoned any such belief, however, and 
there is no doubt that they viewed with dismay any 
mutilation of the body, although they preserved in 
their religious texts frequent allusions to the collecting 
of the members of the body, and the gathering together 
of the bones. The LXIIIrd Chapter, which existed in 
two versions in the XVIIIth Dynasty, also seems to 
allude to certain funeral practices of the pre-dynastic 
Egyptians, for one version was written to protect a 
man from being burnt in the underworld, and the 
other to prevent him from being scalded or boiled. In 
historic times the Kgyptians neither burned nor sealded 


INTRODUCTION XX1X 


nor boiled their dead, but we have seen above that the 
pre-dynastic Egyptians partly burned their dead, and it 
is probable that they often removed the flesh from the 
bones of the dead by boiling as well as by scraping 
them. There are numerous passages in the various 
Chapters of the Book of the Dead which seem to con- 
tain allusions to pre-dynastic funeral customs, and 
many of the Chapters refer to natural conditions of the 
country which can only have obtained during the 
period that preceded the advent of the immigrants 
from the Hast. It is clear that those who introduced 
the Book of the Dead into Egypt claimed to be able to 
protect the dead body from calamities of every kind, 
either by means of magical names, or words, or cere- 
monies, and that the indigenous peoples of the country 
accepted their professions and adopted many of their 
funeral customs, together with the beliefs which had 
produced them. They never succeeded wholly in 
inducing them to give up many of their crude notions 
and fantastic beliefs and imageries, and more and more 
we see in all ages the ideas and notions of the semi- 
barbarous, North African, element in the Book of the 
Dead contending for recognition with the superior and 
highly moral and spiritual beliefs which it owed to 
the presence of the Asiatic element in Egypt. The 
Chapters of the Book of the Dead are a mirror in which 
are reflected most of the beliefs of the various races 
which went to build up the Egyptian of history, and to 
this fact is due the difficulty of framing a connected 


XXX INTRODUCTION 


and logical account of what the Egyptians believed at 
any given period in their history. But there is reason 
for hoping that, as the texts become more studied, and 
more information and facts concerning the pre-dynastic 
peoples of Egypt become available, it will be possible to 
sift such beliefs and to classify them according to their 
source, 

To assign a date to the period when the Book of the 
Dead was introduced into Egypt is impossible, but it 
is certain that it was well known in that country before 
‘ the kings of the Ist Dynasty began to rule over the 
country. In the first instance the prayers and petitions, 
which in later days were grouped and classified into 
Chapters, were comparatively simple, and probably few 
in number, and their subject matter was in keeping 
with the conditions under which the dead were buried 
in the home of those who brought them into Egypt. 
At first also they were recited from memory, and not 
from written copies, and they were, no doubt, preserved 
by oral tradition for a very long time. Meanwhile the 
prayers, and petitions, and formulae increased in number 
and in length, and were in other particulars made 
applicable to the conditions under which men were 
buried in Egypt, and at length they were done into 
writing; but this only took place when the priests 
began to be in doubt about the meaning of their 
contents, and when they found that certain of them 
were becoming forgotten. It is scarcely likely that at 
that remote period any effective supervision of the 


INTRODUCTION XXX1 


accuracy of the written copies by a central authority 
was attempted, and though the copyists in their copies 
adhered in the main to the versions of the prayers, 
ete., which they had received, variations, additions, 
and mistakes, that were often due to the misreading of 
the characters, soon crept into them. Experience has 
shown that it is extremely difficult to preserve, even in 
these days of printing and stereotype, the text of a 
work in an accurate and genuine state, and when copies 
of a text have to be multiplied by hand the difficulty is 
increased a thousand-fold. For, besides the mistakes 
due to the carelessness and ignorance, and to the 
fatigue of the eye and the hand of the copyist, there 
remain to be considered the additions and interpo- 
lations which are always made by the scribe who 
wishes the text he is copying to represent his own views. 
It was such tendencies as these on the part of scribes 
and copyists which made it necessary for Talmudic 
sages to resort to the means of “casuistic exegesis” 
for the preservation not of the original text of the 
Hebrew Bible but even of that text which had 
become authoritative in their time; and it is a well 
known fact that, within a few years after the 
death of Muhammad the Prophet the notables of the 
Muhammadan world were alarmed at the variations 
which had already crept into the Suras of the Kur‘an, 
and that one of them warned! his master to “stop the 


1 See Muir, The Life of Mahomet, pp. xx., xxi. 


XXX1l1 INTRODUCTION 


people, before they should differ regarding their Scrip- 
ture, as did the Jews and Christians!” In this case 
the variant readings of a national religious book, which 
was held to be of divine origin, were disposed of in a 
most effectual manner, for, as soon as the four authori- 
ties who had been appointed to make a final recension 
of the Arabic text began work, they collected copies 
of the Kur‘én from all parts of the Muhammadan 
dominions, and having decided what readings were to 
be retained, they burnt all the manuscripts containing 
those which they rejected. It seems almost a pity that 
some such drastic method was not employed in the 
formation of a textus receptus of the Book of the Dead. 

The graves of the pre-dynastic dwellers in Egypt 
contain no religious inscriptions, and it is not until we 
come to the time of the dynastic Hgyptians that the 
tombs afford much evidence of the existence of the 
Book of the Dead ; it is, however, certain that parts of 
the Book of the Dead were in general use before the 
period of the rule of the kings of the Ist Dynasty. 
The numerous tombs of priestly officials, and the in- 
scriptions in them, testify that the men for whom they 
were made performed during their lifetime offices in 
connexion with the burial of the dead; such as the 
reading of texts and the performance of ceremonies, 
which we know from the rubrics of the recensions of 
the Book of the Dead of a later period were regarded 
by the Egyptians as essential for salvation; now if the 
official lived and read the texts and performed the 


INTRODUCTION XXX111 


ceremonies of the Book of the Dead, that work must 
gertainly have existed in one form or another, for 
priests were not appointed to read religious books 
which did not exist. The Egyptians themselves have 
not left behind any very definite statement as to their 
belief about the existence of the Book of the Dead in 
pre-dynastic times, but they had no hesitation in 
asserting that certain parts of it were as old as the 
Ist Dynasty, as we may see from the following facts. 
The oldest copy of the Book of the Dead now known 
to exist on papyrus is that which was written for Nu, 
the son of “the overseer of the house of the overseer 
of the seal, Amen-hetep, and of the lady of the house, 
Senseneb ;” this extremely valuable document cannot 
be of later date than the early part of the XVIIIth 
Dynasty.' Of the Sixty-fourth Chapter it gives two 
versions, one much longer than the other, and to each 
version is appended a rubric which assigns a date to 
the text which it follows; the rubric of the shorter 
version declares that the “Chapter was found in the 
“foundations of the shrine of Hennu by the chief 
“mason during the reign of his Majesty, the king of 
“the South and North, Semti” (or, Hesepti), and that 
of the longer version that it “was found in the city of 
“Khemennu (Hermopolis, the city of Thoth) upon a 
“block of iron of the south, which had been inlaid [with 

! The complete text, edited by myeelf, is published in Facsimiles 
of the Papyri of Hunefer, Anhai, Kerdsher, and Netchemet, with 


supplementary teat from the Papyrus of Nu. Published by order of 
the Trustees of the British Museum, London, fol. 1899. 


VOL. I. CG 


XXXIV INTRODUCTION 


“ letters] of real lapis-lazuli, under the feet of the god 
(i.e. Thoth) during the reign of his Majesty, the king 
“of the South and North, Men-kau-Ra (i.e. Mycerinus), 
“by the royal son Heru-ta-ta-f.”. Here then we have 
two statements, one of which ascribes the “ finding” of 
the Chapter to the time of the Ist Dynasty, and the 
other to the [Vth Dynasty; and it is probable that 
both statements are correct, for it is clear that the 
longer version, which is ascribed to the [Vth Dynasty, 
is much longer than that which is ascribed to the Ist 
Dynasty, and it is evident that it is an amplified 
version of the shorter form of the Chapter. The 
meaning of the word “ found” in connexion with the 
Chapter is not quite clear, but it is probable that it 


ce 


does not mean ‘discovery ” only, and that the perform- 
ance of some literary work on the text, such as revision 
or editing, is intended. The mention of king Semti in 
the rubric to the shorter version of the Chapter is of 
interest, especially when we consider the re- 

IN presentations which are found upon the ebony - 
>) tablet of the royal chancellor Hemaka;! this 
=| tablet appears to have been dedicated to the 
honour of Semti, for his Horus name Ten 
iets the | appears upon it side by side with that of 
of Semti. his royal chancellor Hemaka. ‘To the right 
of the name is a scene in which we see the god Osiris, 
wearing the white crown, and seated in a shrine set 


1 See Petrie, The Royal Tombs of the First Dynasty, plate xv., 
No. 16. 


INTRODUCTION XXXV 


upon the top of a short flight of steps; before him is 
a figure of king Semti, who is dancing away out of 
the presence of the god, and he wears the crowns of 
the South and North on his head, and holds in one 
hand the object &, and in the other a staff or paddle. 
That the god in the shrine is Osiris is beyond doubt, 
for he occupies the position at the top of the staircase 
which in later days gained for Osiris the title of “the 
“ood at the top of the staircase;”! on sarcophagi and 
elsewhere pictures are sometimes given of the god sitting 
on the top of the staircase.” Other examples are known 
of kings dancing before their god with a view of pleasing 
him, e.g., Usertsen danced before the god Amsn or Min, 
and Seti I. danced before Sekhet, and the reference in 
the text of Pepi I.* to the king dancing before the 
god, i.e., Osiris, like the reference to the pigmy, 
proves that the custom was common in Hgypt in 
early dynastic times; that the custom was not 
confined to Kgypt is certain from the passage in the 
Bible (2 Samuel vi.-14, ff.), where we are told that 
David danced before the ark of the Lord. Below the 
dancing scene on the tablet are a number of hiero- 
glyphics, the meaning of which is very doubtful, but 
in the left hand corner is one which must represent the 
boat of Hennu, and as we are told that the earliest 


1 Compare ‘‘ May I, Osiris the scribe Ani, triumphant, have a 
portion with him who is on the top of the staircase,” Book of the 
Dead, xxii. 6, 7. 

2 See Bonomi, The Sarcophagus of Oimeneptah, plate 5, 

3 See Recueil de Travaua, vii. 162, 163. 


XXXVv1 INTRODUCTION 


form of the LXIVth Chapter was found in the founda- 
tions of the shrine of Hennu, it seems as if king Semti 
was in some way specially attached to the service of 
this god, or to the performance of ceremonies in which 
the boat of Hennu was a prominent feature ; it must 
also be noted that the figure of Osiris seated in his 
shrine on the top of a short staircase is the oldest 
representation of the god which we have. From the 
fact that the chancellor Hemaka depicts the dancing 
scene on the tablet, and also the boat of Hennu, we 
may assume that the king’s connexion both with the 
god and with the boat was of such a special nature 
that the loyal servant, regarding it as one of the most 
important features of the king’s life, determined to 
keep it in remembrance. There remains another point 
to notice about the LXIVth Chapter. The version of 
it to which the name of Semti is attached is entitled, 
“The Chapter of Knowing the Chapters of Coming 
Forth [by Day] in a single Chapter.” Now, we have 
said above that the Egyptians called the Chapters of 
the Book of the Dead the “ Chapters of Coming Forth 
by Day,” and judging from the title it would seem that 
as early as Semti’s time these Chapters had become so 
numerous that it was all-important to compose, or edit 
one of the Chapters which then existed, in such a way 
that it should contain all the knowledge necessary to 
the dead for their salvation; if this view be correct, 
and there is no reason to doubt it, we have here an 
extraordinary proof of the antiquity of certain parts of 


INTRODUCTION XXXVI 


the Book of the Dead. The contents of the LXIVth 
Chapter are of a remarkable nature, and there is no 
doubt that in all periods of Egyptian history it was 
believed to contain the essence of the Book of the 
Dead, and to be equal in value to all its other Chapters, 
and to have a protective power over the dead which 
was not less than that of all the other Chapters taken 
together. That some important event in the history of 
the Book of the Dead happened during the reign of 
Semti is certain, and that this event had a connexion 
with the doctrine and worship of Osiris is certain from 
the representation of the god and of the boat of 
Hennu, which are given on the contemporaneous tablet 
of Semti’s chancellor Hemaka. 

Of the history of the Book of the Dead during the 
IInd, I1Ird, and [Vth Dynasties we know nothing, and 
no copy of any part of the Recension of it then in use 
has come down to us. During the reign of Men-kau- 
Ra (Mycerinus), a king of the [Vth Dynasty, it is said 
that Chapters XXXs., LXIV., and CXLVIII. were 
“found” by Heru-ta-ta-f, the son of Khufu, a man to 
whom in later ages the possession of great learning was 
ascribed, and it is very probable that, like King Semti, 
he revised or edited the Chapters to which his name is 
attached in rubrics ; for the numerous funeral inscrip- 
tions of the period prove that at that time a Recension 
of the Book of the Dead was in general use. 

During the period of the Vth and VIth Dynasties a 
great development took place in the funeral ceremonies 


XXXVIl1 INTRODUCTION 


that were performed for Egyptian Kings, and Unas, 
Teta, Pepi I., and others covered the greater part of the 
chambers, corridors, ete., of their pyramid tombs with 
series of texts selected from the Book of the Dead in 
the earliest Recension of that work known to us.! 
We possess five selections of texts from this Recension, 
to which, on account of its containing the views held 
by the priests of the colleges of Annu, or Heliopolis, 
the name Heliopolitan has been given, but we have no 
reason for assuming that the Chapters supplied by the 
five selections constitute the entire work. It is im- 
possible at present to indicate exactly all the changes, 
modifications, and additions which the priests of Annu 
made in the work, but -scattered throughout their 
Recension there is abundant evidence to show that 
the Recension upon which they worked was based 
upon two, or perhaps three, earlier Recensions. In 
their Recension also will be found religious ideas and 
beliefs which belong to entirely different strata of 
civilization and religious thought, and it is clear that 
some of them came down from the North African section 
of their ancestors, who at the time when they formulated 
them must have stood but little higher on the ladder 
of civilization than the semi-barbarous tribes of 
Western Africa and the Sfidin. 

Between the VIth and the XIth Dynasties we know 


1 See Maspero, Les Inscriptions des Pyramides de Saqqarah, 
Paris, 1894; this work appeared in sections in Recueil de Travaua, 
tom. iil. ff. 


INTRODUCTION XXXIX 


nothing of the history of the Book of the Dead, and it 
is not until we come to some period in the XIth 
Dynasty that we find other selections from the work. 
But little is known of the events which happened in 
the interval between the VIth and the XIth Dynasties, 
and although in Upper Egypt tombs of considerable 
size and beauty were built, yet no striking development 
in funeral ceremonies took place, and we may assume 
in consequence that no new Recension of the Book of 
the Dead was made; if it was, we certainly have no 
record of it. Belonging to the XIth and XIIth 
Dynasties, however, we have a number of coffins and 
tombs which are inscribed with selections of texts 
from the so-called Heliopolitan Recension ; such texts 
differ in extent only and not in character or conteuts 
from those of the royal pyramids of Sakkara of the 
Vth and VIth Dynasties. Coffins at this period were 
made to represent the main funeral chamber or hall 
of a tomb of an older period, and are covered inside 
with lengthy texts traced in hieratic characters in black 
ink upon the wood, while the outside is plain except 
for a few short inscriptions, which record the name and 
titles of the deceased, and short prayers. Above the 
perpendicular lines of text on all four sides inside the 
coffin are painted pictures of the objects which it was 
customary in those days to present as funeral offerings, 
and above these is a horizontal line of hieroglyphics 
which contains the name of the deceased and usually a 
prayer that funeral offermgs may be made to him for 


xl INTRODUCTION 


‘ever. The texts in such coffins are rarely identical, 
and they have no fixed order, and it seems as if in- 
dividual fancy either of the deceased or of the funeral 
scribe dictated the selection. As no pyramids were 
inscribed with extracts from the Book of the Dead at 
this period it is clear that economy prescribed the 
custom of burying the dead in inscribed wooden coffins, 
which were far cheaper than stone pyramids. 

Between the XIIth and XVIIIth Dynasties there 
comes another break in the history of the Book of the 
Dead, and with the beginning of the XVIIIth Dynasty 
that work enters a new phase of its existence; from 
pyramids the transition was to coffins, and now the 
transition is from coffins to papyri. And here again 
economy probably played an important part. Inscribed 
pyramids, and sarcophagi, and coffins would, necessarily, 
be only made for royal personages and for great and 
wealthy folk, but a roll of papyrus was, in comparison 
with these, an inexpensive thing, especially if the 
services of an ordinary scribe were employed in tran- 
scribing it, or if a man wrote his own copy of the Book 
of the Dead. The greater number of the papyri in- 
scribed with selections of texts from the Book of the 
Dead have been found in the tombs of Thebes, where 
they were copied chiefly for the priests and their wives 
and families, the majority of whom were attached to 
the service of “Amen-Ra, the king of the gods, the 
lord of the thrones of the world,” the seat of whose 
worship was at Thebes; and for this reason the Re- 


INTRODUCTION xli 


cension of the Book of the Dead which we find in 
common use from the XVIIIth to the XXIInd Dynasty 
is genérally called the Theban Recension. The texts 
which the priests of Amen copied were, of course, those 
of Annu, or Heliopolis, and during the earlier centuries 
of the existence of the great brotherhood of the priests 
of Amen they did little more than adopt the religious 
views and doctrines of the sages of that place. As 
time went on, however, and the brotherhood obtained 
greater power, they slowly but surely made their god 
Amen to usurp the attribute of the oldest gods of 
Egypt, and at length, as we may see from Chapter 
CLXXI. (infra, p. 580), his name is included among 
theirs. Fine copies of papyri of the Theban Recension 
vary in length from 15 to 90 feet, and in width from 
12 to 18 inches. In the early part of the XVIIIth 
Dynasty the text is always written in black ink in 
vertical columns of hieroglyphics, which are separated 
from each other by black lines; the titles and initial 
words of the Chapters, and the rubrics and catch-words 
are written in red ink. At this period the scribes 
began to ornament their papyri with designs traced in 
black outline, but such designs, or “ vignettes,” were 
not wholly invented by the priests of Amen, for on 
some of the finest coffins of the XIth Dynasty we find 
painted a number of vignettes which illustrate the 
texts, and in the case of such a vignette as that which 
represents the Elysian Fields we find that the scribe 
of the XVIIIth Dynasty copied the design of the scribe 


xlii INTRODUCTION 


of the XIth Dynasty in all essentials. It is possible that 
the scribe of the earlier period possessed an archetype 
which was their ultimate authority for their vignettes, 
but if they did, no remains of it have up to the present 
been found. In the XIXth Dynasty the vignettes 
were painted in very bright colours, and the texts were, 
little by little, driven into the subordinate position 
which the vignettes occupied at the beginning of the 
XVIIIth Dynasty, when they were traced in black 
outline. In the Papyrus of Hunefer (Brit. Mus. No. 
9901) almost everything has been sacrificed to the 
beautifully coloured vignettes which it contains, and 
as aresult its text of the XVIIth Chapter is so full 
of mistakes that many parts of it have no meaning 
at all. At first the “setting out” of a papyrus was 
done by the scribe, and the artist, if one was em- 
ployed, filled in his vignettes in the spaces which had 
been left blank by the scribe; but subsequently the | 
artist seems to have painted his vignettes first and the 
scribe had to be content with the spaces which had 
been allotted to him by the artist. Long copies of the 
Theban Recension were made in sections, which were 
afterwards joined together, and sometimes several 
scribes and artists, who seem to have been ignorant 
or careless of what each other was doing, were em- 
ployed upon them. Thus fine papyri which have been 
made in sections contain duplicates, and even triplicates 
of some Chapters, and in some cases where duplicates 
occur the arrangement, both of texts and vignettes, is 


INTRODUCTION xliti 


quite different in each. One of the finest illustrated 
papyri in existence, the Papyrus of Ani, omits a large 
section of the text of the XVIIth Chapter, a result 
which is probably due to the scribe, who omitted to 
copy what seems to be the contents of a whole sheet of 
the text. Vignettes, however, have at times a peculiar 
value, for they often supply descriptions of mythological 
scenes, names of gods, ete., which oceur nowhere in the 
texts ; of special importance in this connexion are the 
Judgment Scenes and its accompanying texts, and the 
long vignette to the XVIIth Chapter. In the XXIst 
and XXIInd Dynasties we note a gradual falling off 
in the skill exhibited in the artistic work on the papyri 
of the Book of the Dead, and many changes take place 
in respect of the form as well as their contents. In 
the first place they are shorter and narrower, especially 
those which were made for the priests of Amen, and 
texts are inserted in them which belong to a great 
funeral composition entitled ‘“‘ The Book of that which 
is in the Underworld:”’ Some papyri, however, pre- 
serve many of the characteristics of those of the best 
period, but it almost seems as if the work of both 
scribes and artists had greatly deteriorated, and it 1s 
certain that the views of the priests of Amen with 
reference to the Book of the Dead had changed. Thus 
in the Papyrus of Anhai, of the XXIInd Dynasty 
(Brit. Mus. No. 10,472), we find a vignette represent- 
ing the Creation, and others which have no connexion 
with the Book of the Dead in the strict sense of the 


xliv INTRODUCTION 


term; the artist’s work is good of its kind, and the use 
of gold in it for purposes of illumination is instructive. 
The texts are fragmentary and incomplete, and often 
have no connexion whatsoever with the vignettes which 
accompany them. About this period texts are copied in 
which the scribe has read from the end of the composition 
instead of the beginning; omissions of whole sections 
of texts are frequent ; vignettes are frequently assigned 
to Chapters with which they have no connexion; and 
what appears at first sight to be a Chapter frequently 
consists of nothing but a series of fragments of sentences, 
copied without break merely to fill up the space which 
the artist had left blank for the text. In short, showy 
papyri with inaccurate texts are common at this period. 
It is interesting too to note how great had become the 
influence of the priests of Amen in the XXIInd © 
Dynasty, and how they gradually made their god to 
usurp the attributes of the older gods of Egypt. In 
the Papyrus of the Princess Nesi Khonsu which is pre- 
served in the Gizeh Museum, the hieratic text opens 
with a long detailed list of the titles of Amen-Ra, and 
instead of a selection of Chapters from the Theban 
Recension we find a series of statements, couched 
apparently in legal language, in which Amen-Ra swears 
that he will confer every possible favour upon the 
deceased lady. About the same period it became 
customary to write copies of the Book of the Dead in 
hieratic, and to illustrate them with vignettes traced 
in outline in black ink; some of these papyri measure 


INTRODUCTION xlv 


about 50ft. by 1ft. 6in., but in others the dimensions 
are considerably less. As in the old days, the scribes 
who wrote such papyri observed no rule in the order of 
the Chapters, to which, however, they gave special 
titles; these were, of course, like the texts which 
‘ followed them, copied from the Theban Recension. 

Of the history of the Book of the Dead in the period 
which lies between the end of the XXIInd and the 
beginning of the XXVIth Dynasty we know nothing, 
but this is not much to be wondered at when we 
consider that the period was one of trouble and tumult. 
The priests of Amen-Ra, having made their god to 
usurp the position of Ra and the other gods in the 
religious system of Kgypt, next usurped the kingdom 
on behalf of themselves; but they were unable to 
maintain the authority of Egypt in the countries 
which had been conquered by the great kings of the 
XVIIIth and XIXth Dynasties, and as an inevitable 
result the subject nations and tribes refused to pay the 
tribute which had been imposed upon them. The 
failure in tribute spelt failure in offerings to the 
temples, and consequently loss of temporal power by 
the priests, and when the people of Egypt realized 
that they were losing their position among the nations 
they brought the rule of the priests of Amen to an end. 
The loss of income of both priests and people resulted 
promptly in the curtailment of expense in connexion 
with funeral ceremonies, and thus it happens that the 
burials of the priests were attended with less pomp, 


xlvi INTRODUCTION 


and the custom of making copies of the Book of the 
Dead fell into abeyance; indeed, a time came, about 
B.c. 700, when no copies at all were made, and it 
seems as if this time corresponded with the period of 
the final failure of the priests of Amen to rule the 
country. 

With the rise to power of the kings of the XXVIth 
Dynasty, a general revival of ancient religious and 
funeral customs took place, and the temples were 
cleansed and repaired, and ancient and long-forgotten 
texts were unearthed and copies of them taken, and 
artists and sculptors took the models for their: work 
from the best productions of the masters of the Karly 
Empire. In such a revival the Book of the Dead was 
not forgotten, and there is no doubt that those who 
were the principal authors of the movement became 
fully aware of the fact that the texts which formed 
their old national and religious work sorely needed 
re-editing and re-arranging, and measures were 
accordingly taken to put some system into them. 
How and when exactly this was done cannot be said, 
but it is probable that it was carried out by an 
assembly or college of priests, and the result of their 
labours was the Saite Recension of the Book of the 
Dead. The papyri extant which may be rightly 
assigned to this period show that in this Recension 
the Chapters have a fixed order, and that although 
some selections of texts may be smaller than others, 
the Chapters common to all papyri have always the 


INTRODUCTION xlvil 


same relative order. Hach of the early Recensions of 
the Book of the Dead exhibits peculiarities which 
reflect the religious views of the time when it was 
written, and the Saite Recension is no exception to 
the rule, for included in it are four Chapters 
(CLXIT.-CLXV.) which have no counterparts in the 
papyri of the older period. These Chapters contain 
many foreign words and unusual ideas, and it is much 
to be wished that the circumstances under which they 
were introduced into the Book of the Dead were 
known. ‘The characteristics of the papyri containing 
the Saite Recension are:—I. The text is written in 
long, vertical columns of hieroglyphics of purely con- 
ventional form, separated by black lines; 2. The 
vignettes are traced in outline in black, and generally 
occupy small spaces at the top of the text to which 
they refer, the usual exceptions being those which 
represent the Sunrise or Sunset, the Judgment Scene, 
the Elysian Fields, and the Seven Cows and their 
Bull which illustrates the text of Chapter CXLVIII. 
The Recension of the Book of the Dead in use in 
Ptolemaic times was the Saite, but before the rule of 
the Ptolemies had come to an end a number of short 
religious works intended to be written upon funeral 
papyri had been composed, and it became customary 
to make copies of these for the benefit of the dead, and 
to lay them in the coffin or tomb, rather than selections 
from the older work. It appears as if an attempt was 
made by the scribes to extract from the texts of a 


xlvili INTRODUCTION 


bygone time only such parts as were believed to be 
absolutely necessary for the salvation of the deceased, 
and they omitted the hymns of praise and the addresses 
to the gods, and the compositions which were the 
outcome of beliefs and of a mythology which had long 
been forgotten. Many things in papyri of the period 
show that the scribes were quite ignorant of the mean- 
ing of the texts which they were copying, and also of 
the correct arrangement of the vignettes which they 
added. Of special interest among the works which 
were popular in the Ptolemaic and Graeco-Roman 
periods, and probably later, is the ‘‘ Shai en Sensen,” 
or “ Book of Breathings.” In this composition we find 
ideas and beliefs which were derived from the Book of 
the Dead, and which show that the fundamental con- 
ceptions of the future life were the same as ever in the 
minds of the people; as a summary of all the ideas 
and beliefs that appertain to the immortality and 
happiness of the soul of the deceased and of his dead 
body it is remarkable, and considered from this point 
of view contains scarcely an unnecessary word.’ In 
the Roman period small rolls of papyrus were inseribed 
with series of asseverations concerning the piety of life 
of deceased persons and their happiness in the world 
beyond the grave, and were buried with them, the 
writers’ aim being not so much to glorify the gods of 
Egypt as to secure for the dead the happiness and 


1 A rendering of it will be found in the Appendix (Vol, III., p. 
657). 


INTRODUCTION xlix 


blessings of immortality in the next world at the least 
possible expense in this. But the knowledge of the 
old Recensions of the Book of the Dead was not 
quite dead in the early centuries of the Christian era, 
for on a coffin in Paris, which probably dates from the 
second century after Christ, are written a number of 
texts which are certainly as old as the Pyramids at 
Sakkara, a fact which proves that, when such were 
needed, originals from which to copy them could be 
found, even at that late period. The various 
Recensions of the Book of the Dead may be thus 
summarized :— 

1. THe HeEwropotiraAN Recension: (a2) That which 
was used in the Vth and VIth Dynasties, and 
is found inscribed in hieroglyphics upon the 
walls and chambers of the Pyramids at 
Sakkara; (1) That which was written in 
cursive hieroglyphics upon coffins in the XIth 
and XIIth Dynasties. 

2. THe THEBAN Recension: (a) That which was 
written upon papyri and painted upon coffins in 
hieroglyphics from the XVII[th to the XXIInd 
Dynasties ; (b) That which was written in the 
hieratic character upon papyri in the XXIst 
and XXIInd Dynasties. 

3. Tue Saire Recension, which was written upon 
papyri, coffins, etc., in the hieroglyphic, hieratic, 
and demotic characters during the XX VIth and 
following Dynasties; this was the Recension 

VOL. I. d 


] INTRODUCTION 


which was much used in the Ptolemaic period, 
and which may be regarded as the last form of 
the Book of the Dead. 

In the Graeco-Roman and Roman periods extracts 
from the last Recension were written upon papyri a 
few inches square and buried with the dead, and we 
see that the great religious work of the ancient 
Egyptians, which had been in existence for at least 
5000 years, and mere selections from which would fill 
the walls of the chambers and passages of a pyramid, 
or which would fill several scores of feet of papyrus, or 
would cover a whole coffin, ended its existence in 
almost illegible scrawls hastily traced upon scraps of 
papyrus only a few inches square. 

From first to last throughout the Book of the Dead, 
with the exceptions of Kings Semti and Men-kau-Ra, 
and Heru-ta-ta-f, the son of Khufu, the name of no 
man is mentioned as the author or reviser of any part 
of it. Certain Chapters may show the influence of the 
cult of a certain city or cities, but the Book of the 
Dead cannot be regarded as the work of any one man 
or body of men, and it does not represent the religious 
views and beliefs of any one part only of Egypt; on 
the contrary, the beliefs of many peoples and periods 
are gathered together in it. As a whole, the Book of 
the Dead was regarded as the work of the god Thoth, 
the scribe of the gods, and thus was believed to be of 
divine origin; it was Thoth who spoke the words at 
the Creation which were carried into effect by Ptah 


INTRODUCTION hi 


and Khnemu, and as advocate and helper of the god 
Osiris, and therefore of every believer in Osiris, the 
ascription of the authorship to him is most fitting. 
This view was held down to a late period, for in the 
Book of Breathings,! in an address to the deceased 
it is said, “Thoth, the most mighty god, the lord of 
“Khemennu (Hermopolis), cometh to thee, and he 
“writeth for thee the Book of Breathings with his own 
“fingers.” Copies of the Book of the Dead, and works 
of a similar nature, were placed either in the coffin 
with the deceased, or in some part of the hall of the 
tomb, or of the mummy chamber, generally in a niche 
which was cut for the purpose. Sometimes the 
papyrus was laid loosely in the coffin, but more 
frequently it was placed between the legs of the 
deceased, either just above the ankles or near the 
upper part of the thighs, before the swathing of 
the mummy took place. In the XXIst Dynasty the 
custom grew up of placing funeral papyri in hollow 
wooden figures of the god Osiris, which were placed in 
the tombs, but in later times, when funeral papyri 
were much smaller, they were laid in rectangular 
cavities sunk either in the tops or sides of the 
pedestals to which such figures were attached. At 
first the figure was that of the god Osiris, in his 
character of god of the dead and judge of the under- 
world, but the attributes of the triune god Ptah- 


1 See page 657 ff. 


hi INTRODUCTION 


ry. 1 er 


‘Seker-Ausar, the god of the resurrection, were 
subsequently added to it, and suitable variations in 
the texts written on the papyri which were placed in or 
beneath them were made accordingly. . 


INTRODUCTION hi 


OSIRIS, THE GOD OF JUDGMENT, THE 
RESURRECTION, IMMORTALITY, 
THE ELYSIAN FIELDS, ETC. 


In the oldest religious texts known the absolute 
identity of the deceased with Osiris is always assumed 
by the writer, and in later times the deceased is 
actually called by the name of the god; moreover, in 
every detail of the funeral ceremonies the friends and 
relatives of the dead sought to imitate the ceremonies 
which were declared by tradition to have been per- 
formed for the god, believing that thereby only could 
everlasting life and happiness be assured to the de- 
parted. The history of Osiris is shrouded in the 
mists of remote antiquity, and as the ancient Keyptian 
writers supply us with no information concerning 
their theories about the god there are small grounds 
for hoping that we shall ever possess any authentic 
history of him. It is, however, quite certain that even 
in the earliest dynastic times in Egypt the history of 
Osiris was legendary, and that all the main features of 
the story which Plutarch gave in De Iside et Osiride 
were then current; the scene on the plaque of Semti 


liv INTRODUCTION 


‘(see British Museum, No, 32,650), a king of the Ist 
Dynasty, proves that the “god on the top of the stair- 
case” occupied a most prominent position in the religion 
of the country. The texts of the Heliopolitan Recension 
of the Book of Dead assume throughout that Osiris 
occupied the position of chief of the cycle of the gods 
of the dead, and down to the earliest centuries of the 
Christian era the fundamental ideas expressed in every 
text which was written for the benefit of the dead rest 
on this assumption. It was universally believed that 
Osiris was of divine origin, that he lived upon earth in 
a material body, that he was treacherously murdered 
and cut in pieces, that his sister Isis collected the 
limbs of his body, and, by means of magical words 
which had been specially provided by the god Thoth, 
reconstituted it, that the god came to life again by 
these means, that he became immortal, and entered 
into the underworld, where he became both the judge 
and king of the dead. The dismembering of the body 
of Osiris rather calls to mind the practice of the pre- 
dynastic Egyptians who, at one period, cut the bodies 
of their dead into pieces before burial, and removed the 
head from the body, to which, however, they showed 
special honour by placing it in a raised position in the 
grave. Thus one portion of the legend of Osiris may 
be of indigenous or North African origin; at all events 
the ceremonies connected with the raising up of the 
Tet which were performed in early dynastic times at 
Abydos, where the head of the god was believed to be 


INTRODUCTION lv 


buried, suggest the commemoration of funeral rites 
which can hardly have been introduced by the con- 
querors from the Kast. In the XVIIIth Dynasty it is 
expressly stated in Chapter CLIY. of the Book of the 
Dead (infra, p. 517) that Osiris neither decayed, nor 
putrefied, nor rotted away, nor became worms, nor 
perished, and that he enjoyed existence, being in the 
full possession of all the members of his body. Thus 
the deceased King Thothmes III. is made to say, “I 
“shall live, I shall live. I shall grow, I shall grow, I 
“shall grow. I shall wake up in peace; I shall not 
“putrefy ; my intestines shall not perish ; I shall not 
“suffer from any defect; mine eye shall not decay, 
“the form of my visage shall not disappear; mine 
“ear shall not become deaf; my head shall not be 
“separated from my neck; my tongue shall not be 
“carried away; my hair shall not be cut off; mine 
“eyebrows shall not be shaved off; and no baleful 
“injury shall come upon’ me. My body shall be 
“stablished (i.e., constituted), and it shall neither 
“fall into decay nor be destroyed upon this earth.” 
And the king, and every other follower of Osiris, 
believed that he would enjoy everlasting life and 
happiness in a_ perfectly constituted body because 
Osiris had conquered death, and had risen from the 
dead, and was living in a body which was perfect in all 
its members ; moreover, for countless generations Osiris 
was the type and emblem of the resurrection, and rely- 
ing upon his power to give immortality to man untold 


lvi INTRODUCTION 


. generations lived and died. In the hymns which are 
addressed to him he is called the “king of eternity, the 
“lord of the everlasting, who passeth through millions 
“of years in his existence ” (see p. 18); and again it is 
said (see p. 67), “The dead rise up to see thee, they 
“breathe the air and they look upon thy face when the 
“Disk riseth on its horizon ; their hearts are at peace 
“inasmuch as they behold thee, O thou who art 
“ Kternity and Kverlastingness.” Still more remarkable 
are the words which were addressed to him by the god 
Thoth and which are found in the Papyrus of Hu-nefer 
(see p. 623) ; the scribe of the gods having enumerated 
all the titles of Osiris in a series of paragraphs, and 
shown how love for him permeates every god, says, 
“Homage to thee, O Governor of those who are 
“in Amentet, who dost make men and women to 


ae beeen fh the Ms INC ‘SS Ay dh SJ XS 


mes tememu uhem 


the new birth being the birth into Hee new life 
of the world which is beyond the grave, and is 
everlasting. 

All the pictures of the god Osiris known to us in 
funeral texts represent him as a being swathed in 
mummied form, and wearing on his head the white crown, 
and holding in his hands the emblems of sovereignty 
and dominion ; but those which represent the deceased 
make him to appear in the ordinary garb of a man who 
is dressed in ceremonial attire, and he is seen in the 
Judgment Hall and other places in heaven in the form 


INTRODUCTION lvii 


wherein he went about upon earth. There is reason 
for thinking that pre-dynastic man believed that his 
dead would live again in the identical bodies which 
they had upon earth, i.e., in a material resurrection, 
and there is no doubt that the funeral offerings which 
‘they placed in their graves and tombs were intended to 
be their food in the next world whilst they were accom- 
modating themselves to their new circumstances. In 
later times, although the funeral offerings were made as 
before, the belief in a material resurrection was given 
up by educated Egyptians, and in texts, both of the 
earliest and latest periods of Egyptian history, it is 
distinctly stated that the material part of man rests in 
the earth whilst the immaterial part has its abode in 
heaven. Thus in a text of the Vth Dynasty ' we read, 
“Ra receiveth thee, soul in heaven, body in earth ;” 
and in one of the VIth Dynasty” it is said to the 
deceased, “Thine essence is in heaven, thy body is in the 
“earth”; and in a text of the Ptolemaic period® it is 
declared to the deceased, “ Heaven hath thy soul, 
“earth hath thy body.” In another text, also of a late 
date, the deceased is addressed in these words, ‘“‘ Thy 
“soul is in heaven before Ra, thy double hath that 
“which should be given unto it with the gods, thy 
“spiritual body is glorious among the spirits of fire, 


1 Pyramid of Unas, line 582. 

2 Pyramid of Teta, line 304. 

3 See J. de Horrack, Lamentations @Isis et de Nephthys, Paris, 
1866, p. 6. 

4 See Lieblein, Que mon nom flewrisse, p. 2, 1. 2ff., and p. 17, 
1, 2 ff. 


Iviii INTRODUCTION 


“and thy material body is stablished in the under- 
“world (i.e., grave).” All the available evidence shows 
that the Egyptians of dynastic times mummified the 
dead body because they believed that a spiritual body 
would “ germinate” or develop itself init. We know 
that an ancient belief held that the head of Osiris was 
buried at Abydos, and many cities of Egypt claimed 
that limbs of Osiris were buried in them, and one 
tradition affirmed that the whole body of the god rested 
in Annu or Heliopolis. The texts show that the 
Egyptians believed that, if the prescribed prayers were 
said and the appropriate ceremonies were properly per- 
formed over the dead body by duly appointed priests, 
it acquired the power of developing from out of itself 
an immaterial body called sdhu, which was able to 
ascend to heaven and to dwell with the gods there. 
The sdhu took the form of the body from which it 
sprang and was immortal, and in it lived the soul. 
The god Osiris possessed a sdhu in the Egyptian 
heaven, and in Chapter CXXX. of the Book of the 
the Dead (line 36) the deceased Nu is declared to have 
received this sdiu from the god; in other words, 
Osiris rewarded the beatified dead by bestowing upon 
them his own spiritual form ; and elsewhere (see p. 349) 
the deceased says, ‘‘ Behold, verily I have said unto 
“thee, O Osiris, ‘I am a sdhu of the god,’” ie., of 
Osiris. The proof that the soul dwelt in the sdhw is 
furnished by a passage in the LXXXIXth Chapter, 
wherein the deceased addresses the “gods who make 


INTRODUCTION lix 


“souls to enter into their sau” (see p. 280), and the 
distinct difference between the material and spiritual 
body is well illustrated by the following petition, which 
comes at the end of the same Chapter :—“ And behold, 
“orant ye that the soul of Osiris Ani, triumphant, may 
“come forth before the gods and that it may be trium- 
“phant along with you in the eastern part of the sky 
“to follow unto the place where it (e., the ‘boat of 
“millions of years’) was yesterday [and that my soul 
“may have] peace, peace in Amentet. May it look 
“upon its material body, may it rest upon its spiritual 
“body; and may its body neither perish nor suffer 
“corruption for ever.” It now remains to enumerate 
briefly the constituent parts of man physically, men- 
tally, and spiritually. 

1. The physical body, which was called khat 


a) a IY, i.e., that which was liable to decay, 


and could only be preserved by mummification. 
2. The ka El a word which by general consent is 


translated “double”; the Coptic equivalent is Kco, 
and it can in most cases be accurately rendered by one 
of the meanings of e/dwAov. The ka was an abstract 
individuality or personality which possessed the form 
and attributes of the man to whom it belonged, and, 
though its normal dwelling place was in the tomb with 
the body, it could wander about at will; it was in- 
dependent of the man and could go and dwell in any 
statue of him. It was supposed to eat and drink, and 


lx INTRODUCTION 


the greatest care was usually taken to lay abundant 
supplies of offerings in the tombs lest the kas of 
those who were buried in them should be reduced 
to the necessity of leaving their tombs and of 
wandering about and eating offal and drinking filthy 
water. 

3. The ba ~~ or soul, was in some inexplicable 


way connected with the ka, in whom or with whom it 
was supposed to dwell in the tomb, and to partake of 
the funeral offerings, although in many texts it is made 
to live with Ra or Osiris in heaven. It seems to have 
been able to assume a material or immaterial form at 
will, and in the former character it is depicted as a 
human-headed hawk; in the Papyrus of Nebget at 
Paris (ed. Devéria and Pierret, pl. 3) it is seen in this 
form flying down the funeral pit, bearmg air and food 
to the mummified body to which it belongs. The soul 
could visit the body whensoever it pleased. 


4. The ab Ms or heart, was closely associated with 


the soul, and it was held to be the source both of the 
animal life and of good and evil in man, The preserva- 
tion of the heart of a man was held to be of the greatest 
importance, and in the Judgment it is the one member 
of the body which is singled out for special examina- 
tion ; here, however, the heart is regarded as having 
been the centre of the spiritual and thinking life, and 
as the organ through which the manifestations of 
virtue and vice revealed themselves, and it typifies 


INTRODUCTION lxi 


everything which the word “conscience” signifies to us. 
The necessity of preserving the material heart was very 
great, and four Chapters of the Book of the Dead 
(XX VIIL—XXXB.) were composed to prevent the 
heart of a man from being carried off or driven away 
from him in the underworld by the “ stealers of hearts.” 
The most favourite of these Chapters was XXXB., which 
is found inscribed on large numbers of green basalt 
amulets, which date from the period of the XIIth 
Dynasty to that of the Romans. The heart amulet is 
made in the form of a scarab or beetle, and both it and 
the Chapter which is associated with it are connected, 
in the Papyrus of Nu (see p. 221), with that version 
of the LXIVth Chapter which is there declared to be 
as old as the time of Men-kau-Ra, a king of the [Vth 
Dynasty. 

5. The khaibit Te or shadow, was closely associated 
with the ba or soul, and was certainly regarded as an 
integral portion of the human economy ; it, like the 


ka, seems to have been nourished by the offerings 
which were made in the tomb of the person to whom it 


a 


belonged. Like the ka also it had an existence apart 
from the body, and it had the power of going whereso- 
ever it pleased. As far back as the time of King Unas ! 
we find that souls and spirits and shadows are men- 
tioned together, and in the XCIInd Chapter of the 
Book of the Dead (see p. 286) the deceased is made to 


1 La Pyramide du roi Ounas, line 523. 


Ixai INTRODUCTION 


say, ““O keep not captive my soul, O keep not ward 
“over my shadow, but let a way be opened for my soul 
“and for my shadow, and let them see the Great God 
“in the shrine on the day of the judgment of souls, 
“and let them recite the utterances of Osiris, whose 
“habitations are hidden, to those who guard the 
‘members of Osiris, and who keep ward over the 
“spirits, and who hold captive the shadows of the dead 
“who would work evil against me.” 


6. The khu & or spirit, is usually mentioned in 


connexion with the ba or soul, and it seems to have 
been regarded as a shining or translucent part of the 
spiritual economy of a man which dwelt with his soul 
in the sdhwu or spiritual body. 


7. The sekhem ; or power, which we may look upon 


as the incorporeal personification of the vital force of a 
man; the sekhem dwelt in heaven among the khus or 
spirits, and in the texts it is usually mentioned in 
connexion with the soul and the spirit. 


——— : 
8. The ren Bh. or name, to preserve which 
NIM 


the Egyptians took the most extraordinary precautions, 
for the belief was widespread that unless the name of a 
man was preserved he ceased to exist. Already in the 
time of King Pepi the name was regarded as a most 
important portion of a man’s economy, and in the 
following passage’ it ranks equally with the sa ;— 


1 La Pyramide dw Roi Pept Le, line 169. 


INTRODUCTION Ixtil 


“The iron which is the ceiling of heaven openeth 
“itself before Pepi, and he passeth through it with his 
“panther skin upon him, and his staff and whip in his 
“hand; Pepi passeth with his flesh, and he is happy 
“with his name, and he liveth with his double.” 
Already in the Pyramid Texts' we find the deceased 
making supplication that his name may “ grow” or 


' La Pyramide dw Roi Pepi 11., line 669 ff. The extract reads :— 

‘* Hail, Great Company of the gods who are in Annu, grant that 
**Pepi Nefer-ka-Ra may flourish, and grant that his pyramid, his 
‘feverlasting building, may flourish, even as the name of T’emnu, 
“‘the Governor of the Great Company of the gods, flourisheth. If 
**the name of Shu, the lord of the upper shrine in Annu, flourisheth, 
‘“*Pepi Nefer-ka-Ra shall flourish, and this his pyramid, his ever- 
‘‘Jasting building, shall flourish. If the name of Tefnut, the lady 
‘* of the lower shrine in Annu, is stablished, the name of this Pepi 
‘*Nefer-ka-Ra shall be stablished, and this pyramid shall be 
‘** stablished for ever. If the name of Seb, the soul of the earth (?), 
** flourisheth, the name of Pepi Nefer-ka-Ra shall flourish, and this 
‘his pyramid shall flourish, and his everlasting building shall 
“flourish. If the name of Nut flourisheth in Het-Shenth in Annu, 
‘the name of this Pepi Nefer-ka-Ra shall flourish, and this his 
“‘pyramid shall flourish, and this his building shall flourish for 
‘‘ever. If the name of Osiris flourisheth in the nome Teni, the 
““name of this Pepi Nefer-ka-Ra shall flourish, and this his pyramid 
«shall flourish, and this his building shall flourish forever. If the 
“name of Osiris, Governor of Amenti, flourisheth, the name of 
‘*this Pepi Nefer-ka-Ra shall flourish, and this his pyramid shall 
‘flourish, and this his building shall flourish for ever. If the 
‘name of Set in Nubt (Ombos) flourisheth, the name of Pepi 
‘*Nefer-ka-Ra shall flourish, and this his pyramid shall flourish, 
‘and this his building shall flourish for ever. If the name of 
** Horus of Behutet flourisheth, the name of this Pepi Nefer-ka-Ra 
**shall flourish, and this his pyramid shall flourish, and this his 
“building shall flourish for ever. If the name of Ra flourisheth in 
*‘the horizon, the name of this Pepi Nefer-ka-Ra shall flourish, 
“and this his building shall flourish for ever. If the name of 
‘‘Khent-Merti in Sekhem is stablished, the name of this Pepi 
‘* Nefer-ka-Ra shall flourish, and this his Pyramid shall flourish, 
and this his building shall flourish for ever. If the name of 
**Uatchit who dwelleth in Tep flourisheth, the name of this Pepi 
‘*Nefer-ka-Ra shall flourish, and this his pyramid shall flourish, 
‘‘and this his building shall flourish for ever.” 


lxiv INTRODUCTION 


“shoot forth” and endure as long as the names of 
Tem, Shu, Seb, and other gods, and, with modifications, 
the prayer written for Pepi IL. in the VIth Dynasty was 
in common use at the Graeco-Roman period in Egypt. 
To preserve the name of his parents was the bounden 
duty of every pious son, and every offering which was 
made in a man’s tomb, however small, provided it was 
coupled with the mention of the deceased’s name, 
helped to keep in existence the person whose name was 
mentioned.! 


9. The sdhu ae g ‘SS Q ih or spiritual body, 


which formed the habitation of the soul. It sprang 
from the material body, through the prayers which 
were said, and the ceremonies which were performed at 
the tomb or elsewhere by duly appointed and properly 
qualified priests, and was lasting and incorruptible. 
In it all the mental and spiritual attributes of the 
natural body were united to the new powers of its own 
nature. 

There is little doubt that the beliefs in the existence 
of these various members of the spiritual and material 
bodies are not all of the same age, and they probably 


1 The idea is pithily expressed in the text of Pepi I. (@ 20) 


© ok ae ne Pie ie 


x 
Py yl 84) me shall liv 
: Fee, A wn a\ =| y name s ive 


upon earth ; thy name shall endure upon earth; thou shalt never 
perish, thou shalt never, never come to an end.” 


INTRODUCTION Ixv 


represent several stages of intellectual development on 
the part of the Egyptians; their origin and develop- 
ment it is now impossible to trace, and the contradic- 
tions in the texts prove that the Egyptians themselves 
had not always definite ideas about the functions of 
each, 

The judgment of the dead took place in the 
Judgment Hall of Osiris, the exact position of which 
is unknown; the Judge was Osiris, who was supported 


by the gods which formed his paut g or company. 


The judgment of each individual seems to have taken 
place soon after death ; those who were condemned in 
the judgment were devoured straightway by the Kater 
of the Dead, and ceased to exist, and those who were 
not condemned entered into the domains of Osiris, 
where they found everlasting life and happiness. 
There are no grounds for thinking that the Egyptians 
believed either in a general resurrection or in pro- 
tracted punishment. The deceased whose heart or 
conscience had been weighed in the balance, and not 
found wanting, was declared to be “maa kheru” 

-— 

sesmpeal re, 
follow the names of the persons for whom they were 
written. They are commonly rendered “ triumphant,” 
or “victorious,” “disant la vérité,” ‘ véridique,” 
“juste,” ‘“justifid,” ‘ vainqueur,” “waltend des 
Wortes,” “michtig der Rede,” “ vrai de voix,” “juste 
de voix,” ete., but their true meaning seems to be “ he 


| and in papyri these words always 
? 


OL. I: e 


Ixvi INTRODUCTION 


whose word is right and true,” i.e, he whose word is 
held to be right and true by those to whom it is 
addressed, and as a result, whatsoever is ordered or 
commanded by the person who is declared in the 
Judgment Hall to be mad Iheru is straightway per- 
formed by the beings or things who are commanded or 
ordered. ‘Thus before the person who possessed the 
“vieht word,” the doors of the halls of the underworld 
were opened, and the beings who had power therein 
became his servants; he had power to go wheresoever 
he pleased, and to do whatsoever he pleased, and he 
became the equal of the gods. The ideas which 
attached to the words mad kherw are well illustrated 
by the following passage from the text of Pepi I. 
(l. 171 ff.):—“O enter into the verdant stream of 
“the Lake of Kha, O fill with water the Fields of 
“Aaru, and let Pepi set sail for the eastern half 
‘of heaven towards that place where the gods are 
“brought forth, wherein Pepi himself may be borne 
“along with them as Heru-khuti, for Pepi is maa 
‘“kKheru, and Pepi acclaimeth, and the ka of Pepi 
“acclaimeth [the gods]. And they call Pepi, and 
“they bring to him these four [gods] who make their 
‘“ way over the tresses of Horus, and who stand with 
“their sceptres in the eastern half of heaven; and 
“they declare to Ra the excellent name of Pepi, and 
“ they exalt the excellent name of Pepi before Neheb- 
“kau, for Pepi is mad kheru, and Pepi acclaimeth, and 
“his ‘a acclaimeth [the gods]. The sister of Pepi is 


INTRODUCTION Ixvil 


‘“ Sothis, and the birth of Pepi is the morning star, 
“and itis he who is under the body of heaven before 
“Ra. Pepi is mad kheru, and he acclaimeth and his 
“ka acclaimeth [the gods].” 

The allusion to the “Fields of Aaru” in the above 
extract leads naturally to a brief mention of the 
“ Sekhet-hetepet,” or Elysian Fields, wherein the 
beatified were believed to lead a life of celestial 
happiness. At a very early period in their history 
the Egyptians believed in the existence of a place 
wherein the blessed dead led a life of happiness, the 
characteristics of which much resemble those of the 
life which he had led upon earth ; these characteristics 
are so similar that it is hard to believe that in the 
early times the one life was not held to be a mere 
continuation of the other. At all events, the delights 
and pleasures of this world were believed to be forth- 
coming in the next, and a life there in a state of 
happiness which depended absolutely upon material 
things was contemplated. Such ideas date from the 
time when the Egyptians were in a semi-savage state, 
and the preservation of them is probably due to their 
extreme conservatism in all matters connected with 
religion; the remarkable point about them is their 
persistence, for they occur in texts which belong to 
periods when it was impossible for the Egyptians to 
have attached any serious importance to them, and 
some of the coarsest ideas are in places mingled with 
the expression of lofty spiritual conceptions. In a 


Ixviil INTRODUCTION 


passage in the text of Unas it is said of this king 
(1. 623), ““Unas hath come to his pools which are on 
“both sides of the stream of the goddess Meht-urt, and 
“to the place of verdant offerings, and to the fields 
“ which are on the horizon; he hath made his fields 
“on both sides of the horizon to be verdant. He hath 
“ brought the crystal to the Great Hye which is in the 
“field, he hath taken his seat in the horizon, he 
‘‘ riseth like Sebek the son of Neith, he eateth with his 
“ mouth, he voideth water, he enjoyeth the pleasures of 
“love, and he is the begetter who carrieth away women 
“from their husbands whenever it pleaseth him so to 
do.” And in the text of Teta (1. 286 f.) we read, 
“ Hail, Osiris Teta, Horus hath granted that Thoth 
‘shall bring thine enemy unto thee. He hath placed 
“thee behind him that he may not harm thee and that 
“ thou mayest make thy seat upon him, and that when 


cc 


“coming forth thou mayest sit upon him so that he 
“may not be able to force intercourse upon thee.” 
Such passages give a very clear idea of the state of 
Egyptian morals when they were written, and they 
indicate the indignities to which those vanquished in 
war, both male and female, were exposed at the hands 
of the conquerors. 

The texts of the early period supply much in- 
formation about the pleasures of the deceased in the 
world beyond the grave, but no attempt to illustrate 
the employments of the blessed dead is given until the 
XVIIIth Dynasty, when the vignette to the CXth 


INTRODUCTION Ixix 


Chapter of the Book of the Dead was inserted in papyri:' 
Here we have an idea given of the conception which the 
Egyptian formed of the place wherein he was to dwell 
after death. A large homestead or farm, intersected 
with canals, is at once his paradise and the home of the 
blessed dead, and the abode of the god of his city. 
This place is called Sekhet-Aaru or “ Field of Reeds,” 
and the name certainly indicates that at one time the 
Egyptian placed his paradise in the north of Egypt, 
probably in some part of the Delta, near Tattu, or 
Busiris, the capital of the Busirite or ninth nome of 
Lower Egypt. It was here that the reconstitution, of 
the dismembered body of Osiris took place, and it was 


here that the solemn ceremony of setting up the i or 


backbone of Osiris, was performed each year. The 
Field of Reeds, however, was but a portion of the 
district called “Sekhet-Hetep” or “Sekhet-Hetepet,” 
or “Fields of Peace,” over which there presided a 
number of gods, and here the deceased led a life which 
suggests that the idea of the whole place originated 
with a nation of agriculturists, In the vignettes we 
see the deceased sailing in a boat laden with offerings 
which he is bearing to the hawk-god. In another place 
he is reaping wheat and driving the oxen which tread 
out the corn, and beyond that he is kneeling before two 
heaps of grain, one red and one white, In the next 

1 The earliest form of this vignette known to me occurs inside 


one of the Al-Bersheh coffins, and is as old as the XIth or XIIth 
Dynasty. 


Ixx INTRODUCTION 


division he is ploughing the land of Sekhet-Anru or 
Sekhet-Aaru, by the side of a stream of vast length and 
unknown breadth, which contains neither worm nor 
fish. In the fourth division is the abode of the god 
Osiris, and here are the places where dwell those who 
are nourished upon divine food, and the spiritual bodies 
of the dead. In one section of this division the 
deceased placed the god of his city, so that even in 
respect of his religious observances his life might be as 
perfect as it was upon earth. His wishes in the matter 
of the future life are represented by the following 
prayer :—“ Let me be rewarded with thy fields, O god 
“Hetep; that which is thy wish shalt thou do, O 
“lord of the winds. May I become a spirit therein, 
‘may I eat therein, may I drink therein, may I plough 
“therein, may I reap therein, may I fight therein, may 
“T make love therein, may my words be mighty therein, 
“may I never be in a state of servitude therein, but 
“may I have authority therein.” Elsewhere in the 
same Chapter the deceased addresses the gods of the 
various lakes and sections of the Elysian Fields, and 
he states that he has bathed in the holy lake, that all 
uncleanness has departed from him, and that he has 
arrayed himself in the apparel of Ra; in his new life 
even amusements are provided (but they are the 
amusements of earth), for he snares feathered fowl] and 
sails about in his boat catching worms and serpents. 
In the texts of all periods we read often that the 
deceased lives with Ra, that he stands among the 


INTRODUCTION Ixxi 


company of the gods, and that he is one like unto the 
divine beings who dwell with them; -but little is told 
us concerning his intercourse with those whom he has 
known upon earth, and if it were not for some two or 
three passages in the Theban Recension of the Book of 
the Dead we should be obliged to assume that the 
power to recognize the friends of earth in the next 
world was not enjoyed by the deceased, But that he 
really possessed this power, at least so far as his 
parents were concerned, we Jearn from the CXth Chapter, 
where the deceased, addressing a pool or lake situated 
in the first section of the Elysian Fields, says, ‘“O 
“ Qengentet, I have entered into thee, and I have seen 
“the Osiris [my father], and I have recognized my 
“mother,” a delight, however, which he brackets with 
the pleasures of making love and of catching worms 
and serpents! In the papyrus of the priestess Anhai 
(see p. 325) we actually see the deceased lady in con- 
verse with two figures, one of whom is probably her 
father and the other certainly her mother, for above 
the head of the latter are written the words “her 
mother” (mut-s) followed by the name. A supple- 
mentary proof of this is afforded by a passage in the 
LIInd Chapter, where the deceased says :—“ The gods 
“shall say unto me: ‘What manner of food wouldst 
“*thou have given unto thee?’ [And I reply:] ‘Let me 
“*eat my food under the sycamore tree of my lady, the 
“goddess Hathor, and let my times be among the 
““divine beings who have alighted thereon. Let me 


Ixxii INTRODUCTION 


“have the power to order my own fields in Tattu 
“and my own growing crops in Annu. Let me live 
“upon bread made of white barley, and let my ale be 
““lmade] from red grain, and may the persons of my 
‘‘* father and my mother be given unto me as guardians 
““of my door and for the ordering of my territory.’” 
The same idea is also expressed in the CLXXXIXth 
Chapter (1. 7). Thus the deceased hoped to have in 
the next world an abundance of the material comforts 
which he enjoyed in this world, and to meet again his 
own god, and his father and mother; as we see him 
frequently accompanied by his wife in several vignettes 
to other Chapters we may assume that he would meet 
her again along with the children whom she bore him. 

It will be noticed that little is said throughout the 
Book of the Dead about the spiritual occupations of 
the blessed dead, and we are told nothing of the choirs 
of angels who hymn the Deity everlastingly in the 
religious works of later Western nations. The dead 
who attained to everlasting life became in every respect 
like the divine inhabitants of heaven, and they ate the 
same meat, and drank the same drink, and wore the 
same apparel, and lived as they lived. No classifica- 
tion of angels is mentioned, and grades of them like 
Cherubim, and Seraphim, Thrones, Powers, Dominions, 
etc., such as are found in the celestial hierarchy of 
Semitic nations, are unknown; a celestial city con- 
structed on the model described in the Apocalypse is 
also unknown, 


INTRODUCTION lxxiil 


We have seen that the Elysian Fields much resembled 
the flat, fertile lands intersected by large canals and 
streams of running water, such as must always have 
existed and may still be seen in certain parts of the 
Delta; of the distance to be traversed by the dead be- 
fore they were reached nothing whatever is said. As 
the Egyptian made his future world a counterpart of 
the Egypt which he knew and loved, and gave to it 
heavenly counterparts of all the sacred cities thereof, 
he must have conceived the existence of a water way 
like the Nile, with tributaries and branches, whereon 
he might sail and perform his journeys. According to 
some texts the abode of the dead was away beyond 
Egypt to the north, but according to others it might be 
either above or below the earth. The oldest tradition 
of all placed it above the earth, and the sky was the 
large flat or vaulted iron surface which formed its floor; 
this iron surface was supported upon four pillars; one 
at each of the cardinal points, and its edges were some 
height above the earth. To reach this iron ceiling of 
the earth and floor of heaven a ladder was thought to 
be necessary, as we may see from the following passage, 
in which Pepi the king says, ‘‘Homage to thee, O 
“ladder! of the god, homage to thee, O ladder of Set. 
“ Set thyself up, O ladder of the god, set thyself up, 
“QO ladder of Set, set thyself up, O ladder of Horus, 
“whereby Osiris appeared in heaven when he wrought 


l D ‘SN a i maget (Popi I., 1. 192). 
fam. 


Ixxiv INTRODUCTION 


“protection for Ra ..... For it is thy son Pepi, and 
“this Pepi is Horus, and thou hast given birth to this 
“ Pepi even as thou hast given birth to the god who is 
“the lord of the ladder. Thou hast given unto him 
“the ladder of the god, and thou hast given unto him 
“the ladder of Set, whereby this Pepi hath appeared in 
“heaven, when he wrought protection for Ra.” 

A later belief placed the abode of the departed away 
to the west or north-west of Egypt, and the souls of 
the dead made their way thither through a gap in the 
mountains on the western bank of the Nile near Abydos. 
A still later belief made out that the abode of the de- 
parted was a long, mountainous, narrow valley with a 
river running along it; starting from the east, it made 
its way to the north, and then taking a circular direction 
it came back to the east. In this valley there lived all 
manner of fearful monsters and beasts, and here was 
the country through which the sun passed during the 
twelve hours of night.! It is impossible to reconcile 
all the conflicting statements concerning the abode of 
the dead, and the Egyptians themselves held different 
views about it at different periods. 

The Egyptians, from the earliest to the latest period 
of their history, were addicted to the use of magical 
formulae which were thought to be able to effect results 
usually beyond the power of man, and they accom- 
panied the recital of such formulae by the performance 
of certain ceremonies. The formulae consisted of the 


1 See my Papyrus of Ant, p. civ. 
y iL ) 


INTRODUCTION Ixxv 


repetition of the names of gods and supernatural beings, 
benevolent or hostile to man as the case might be, and of 
entreaties or curses; the ceremonies were of various kinds.! 

The Egyptian believed that every word spoken 
under certain circumstances must be followed by some 
effect, good or bad; a prayer uttered by a properly 
qualified person, or by a man ceremonially pure, in 
the proper place, and in the proper manner, must 
necessarily be answered favourably; and _ similarly 
the curses which were pronounced upon a man, or 
beast, or thing, in the name of a hostile supernatural 
being were bound to result in harm to the object 
cursed. This idea had its origin in the belief that the 
world and all that therein is came into being imme- 
diately after Thoth had interpreted in words the will 
of the deity, in respect of the creation of the world, 
and that creation was the result of the god’s command. 
In very early times the Egyptian called in the pro- 
fessional religious man to utter words of good omen 
over the dead body of his relative or friend, and later 
the same words written upon some substance and 
buried with him were believed to be effectual in pro- 
curing for him the good things of the life beyond the 
grave. In the text on the pyramid of Unas (1. 583) is 
areference to something written which the deceased 
was supposed to possess, in the following words :— 
“The bone and flesh which have no writing’ are 


ee 
See my Eyyptian Magic, London, 1899. a a sesh. 


Ixxvi INTRODUCTION 


“ wretched, but, behold, the writing of Unas is under 
“the great seal, and behold, it is not under the little 
“seal.” And in the text on the pyramid of Pepi I. we 
find the words, “The uraeus of this Pepi is upon his 
‘head, there is a writing on each side of him, and he 
“hath words of magical power at his two feet”; thus 
equipped the king enters heaven. 

A common way to effect certain results, good or 
evil, was to employ figures made of various sub- 
stances, chiefly wax, or amulets made of precious 
stones and metals in various forms; both figures and 
amulets were inscribed with words which gave them 
the power to carry out the work assigned to them 
by those who caused them to be made. It is well 
known that the Egyptians believed that the qualities 
and much else, including the ka, of a living original 
could be transferred to an image thereof by means of 
the repetition over it of certain formulae, and a good 
or evil act done to a statue or figure resulted in good 
or evil to the person whom it represented. 

About the time of the XVIIIth Dynasty, we learn 
from a papyrus' that a man was prosecuted in Egypt 
for having made figures of men and women in wax, 
by which he caused sundry and divers pains and 
sicknesses to the living beings whom they represented. 
And, according to Pseudo-Callisthenes,? Nectanebus 
wrought magic by means of a bowl of water, some 


1 Chabas, Le Papyrus Magique Harris, p. 170 ff. 
2 Hd. Miiller, lib. 1, cap. 1 ff. 


INTRODUCTION Ixxvii 


waxen figures, and an ebony rod. ‘The waxen figures 
were made in the forms of the soldiers of the enemy 
who were coming against him by sea or by land, and 
were placed upon the water in the basin by him. 
Nectanebus then arrayed himself in suitable apparel, 
and, having taken the rod in his hand, began to recite 
certain formulae and. the names of divine powers 
known unto him, whereupon the waxen figures became 
animated, and straightway sank to the bottom of the 
bowl; at the same moment the hosts of the enemy 
were destroyed. If the foe was coming by sea he 
placed the waxen soldiers in waxen ships, and at the 
sound of the words of power both ships and men sank 
into the waves as the waxen models sank to the bottom 
of the bowl. The same informant tells us that when 
Nectanebus wished Olympias, the mother of Alexander 
the Great, to believe that the god Ammon had visited 
her during the night, he went forth from her presence 
into the plain and gathered a number of herbs which 
had the power of causing dreams, and pressed out the 
juice from them. He then fashioned a female figure in 
the form of Olympias, and inscribed the Queen's name 
upon it, and having made the model of a bed he laid 
the figure thereon. Nectanebus next lit a lamp, and 
reciting the words of power which would compel the 
demons to send Olympias a dream, he poured out the 
juice of the herbs over the waxen figure ; and at the 
moment of the performance of these acts Olympias 
dreamed that she was in the arms of the god Ammon. 


Ixxvill INTRODUCTION 


The most important mention of figures in the Book 
of the Dead occurs in the VIth Chapter. When the 
Egyptian, in very early days, conceived the existence 
of the Elysian Fields it occurred to him that the agri- 
cultural labours which would have to be carried out 
there might entail upon himself toil and fatigue. To 
avoid this a short Chapter (V.) was drawn up, the 
recital of which was believed to free the deceased from 
doing any work in the underworld. But it was felt 
that the work must be done by, some person or thing, 
and eventually it became the custom to bury a figure 
or figures of the deceased with him in his tomb so that 
it or they might perform whatever work fell to his 
share. ‘To these figures the Egyptian gave the name 
ushabtiw, a word which is commonly rendered by “ re- 
spondents ” or “ answerers,” and they are often described 
in modern times as the “ working figures of Hades.” 

Several of the Chapters of the Book of the Dead 
are followed by Rubrics which give directions for the 
performance of certain magical ceremonies, and among 
them may be specially mentioned the following :— 

Chap. XIII. This Chapter was to be recited over 
two rings made of dnkhdim flowers; one was to be 
laid on the right ear of the deceased, and the other 
was to be wrapped up in a piece of byssus whereon 
the name of the deceased was inscribed. 

Chap. XIX. This Chapter was to be recited over 
the divine chaplet which was laid upon the face of 
the deceased while incense was burnt on his behalf. 


INTRODUCTION ]xxix 


Chap. C. This Chapter was to be recited over a 
picture of the boat of the Sun painted with a special 
ink upon a piece of new papyrus, which was to be 
laid on the breast of the deceased, who would then 
have power to embark in the boat of Ra and to 
journey with the god. 

Chap. CXXV. The Judgment Scene was to be 
painted upon a tile made of earth upon which neither 
the pig nor any other animal had trodden; and if the 
text of the Chapter was also written upon it, the 
deceased and his children would flourish for ever, his 
name would never be forgotten, and his place would 
henceforth be with the followers of Osiris. 

Chap. CXXX. This Chapter was to be recited over 
a picture of the god Ra wherein a figure of the 
deceased sitting in the bows was drawn; this done, the 
soul of the deceased would live for ever. 

Chap. CXXXIII. This Chapter was to be recited 
over a faience model of the boat of Ra, four cubits in 
length, whereon the figures of the divine chiefs were 
painted ; painted figures of Ra and of the Khu of the 
deceased were to be placed in the boat. A model of 
the starry heavens was also to be made and upon it 
the model of the boat of Ra was to be moved about, in 
imitation of the motion of the boat of the god in 
heaven; this ceremony would cause the deceased to 
be received by the gods in heaven as one of themselves. 
_ Chap. CXXXIV. This Chapter was to be recited 
over figures of a hawk (Ra), Tem, Shu, Tefnut, Seb, 


Ixxx INTRODUCTION 


Nut, Osiris, Isis, Suti, and Nephthys painted on a 
plaque, which was to be placed in a model of the 
boat of Ra wherein the deceased was seated; this 
ceremony would cause the deceased to travel with Ra 
in the sky. 

Chap. CXXXVIA. This Chapter was to be recited 
over a figure of the deceased seated in the boat of Ra. 

Chap. CXXXVITIA. This Chapter was to be recited 
over four fires, fed by a special kind of cloth anointed 
with unguent, which were to be placed in the hands 
of four men who had the names of the pillars of Horus 
written upon their shoulders. Four clay troughs, 
whereon incense had been sprinkled, were to be filled 
with the milk of a white cow, and the milk was to 
be employed in extinguishing the four fires. If this 
Chapter were recited daily (?) for the deceased he 
would become like unto Osiris in every respect. The 
Rubric supplies a series of texts which were to be 
recited :—(1) over a Tet of crystal set in a plinth, 
which was to be placed in the west wall of the tomb ; 
(2) over a figure of Anubis set in a plinth, which was 
to be placed in the east wall; (3) over a brick smeared 
with pitch which was set on fire, and then placed in 
the south wall; and (4) over a brick inseribed with 
the figure of a palm tree, which was set in the north 
wall. 

Chap. CXL. This Chapter was. to be recited over 
an utchat, or figure of the Kye of Horus, made either 
of lapis-lazuli or Mak stone, and over another made 


INTRODUCTION Ixxxi 


of jasper. During the recital of the Chapter four 
altars were to be lighted for Ra-Tem, and four for the 
Utchat, and four for the gods who were mentioned 
therein. 

Chap. CXLIV. The seven sections of this Chapter 
were to be recited over a drawing of the Seven Arits, 
at each of which three gods were seated; by these 
means the deceased was prevented from being turned 
back at the door of any one of the seven mansions of 
Osiris. 

Chap. CLXII. This Chapter was to be recited over 
the figure of a cow made of fine gold which was to 
be placed at the neck of the deceased; during the 
performance of this ceremony the priest is ordered 
to say, “O Amen, O Amen, who art in heaven, turn 
“thy face upon the dead body of thy sou and make 
“ him sound and strong in the underworld.” 

Chap. CLXIII. This Chapter was to be recited 
over a serpent having legs and wearing a disk and two 
horns, and over two wtchats having both eyes and 
wings. 

Chap. CLXIV. This Chapter was to be recited over 
a three-headed, ithyphallic figure of Mut painted upon 
a piece of linen, and over the figures of two dwarfs 
painted one on each side of the goddess. 

Chap. CLXV. This Chapter was to be recited over 
the figure of the “god of the lifted hand,” who had 
a body in the form of that of a beetle. 

Besides these a number of Chapters have Rubrics, 

VOL. I. “fi 


Ixxxii INTRODUCTION 


varying in length from two to twenty lines, which 
declare that if the deceased be acquainted with their 
contents or if they be inscribed upon his coffin, they 
will enable him to attain great happiness and free- 
dom in the world beyond the grave. Seven other 
Chapters consist of texts which were written upon 
the amulets that were usually laid upon the mummy, 
namely, Nos. XX Xs., LUX XXIX., CLY., CLVL., CLVIL., 
CLVIIL., and CLIX. 

Finally, mention must be made here of the great 
importance attached by the Egyptians to the know- 
ledge of the names of gods, supernatural beings, etc., 
and it seems that the deceased who was ignorant of 
them must have fared badly in the underworld. Thus 
in Chapter Is. it is said that the deceased knoweth 
Osiris and his names; in Chapter XCIX. the deceased 
is obliged to tell the names of every portion of the 
boat wherein he wishes to cross the great river in the 
underworld; in Chapter CXXV. Anubis makes him 
declare the names of the two leaves of the door of the 
Hall of Osiris before he will let him in, and even the 
bolts, and bolt-sockets, and lintels, and planks will not 
alow him to enter until the deceased has satisfied 
them that he knows their names. Entrance into the 
seven Arits or mansions could not be obtained without 
a knowledge of the names of the doorkeeper, watcher, 
and herald who belonged to each; and similarly, the 
pylons of the domains of Osiris could not be passed 
through by the deceased without a declaration by him 


INTRODUCTION Ixxxill 


of the name of each. The idea underlying all such 
statements 1s that the man who knows the name of a 
god could invoke and obtain help from him by calling 
upon him, and that the hostility of a fiend could be 
successfully opposed by the repetition of his name. 
The knowledge of the names of fiends and demons con- 
stituted the chief power of the magicians of olden times, 
and the amulets of the Gnostics which were inscribed 
with numbers of names of supernatural powers are the 
practical expression of the belief in the efficacy of the 
knowledge of names which existed in Egypt from time 
immemorial. 


Ixxxiv INTRODUCTION 


THE OBJECT AND CONTENTS OF THE 
BOOK OF THE DEAD. 


THoucH the Chapters of the Book of the Dead re- 
present beliefs belonging to various periods of the 
long life of the Egyptian nation, and opinions held 
by several schools of thought in Egypt, the object 
of them all was to benefit the deceased. They were 
intended to give him the power to have and to enjoy 
life everlasting, to give him everything which he 
required in the life beyond the grave, to ensure his 
victory over his foes, to procure for him the power of 
going whithersoever he pleased and when and how he 
pleased, to preserve the mummy intact, and finally to 
enable his soul to enter into the bark of Ra or into — 
whatever abode of the blessed had been conceived of 
by him. 

A certain number of the Chapters of the Book of 
the Dead are hymns which are ‘addressed either to 
Ra or to Osiris. With these hymns should be 
mentioned the texts which accompany the Judgment 
Scene, which are described on p. 22 ff. The Judg- 
ment Scene also leads us to the consideration of the » 
CXXVth Chapter, which is certainly one of the most 
important and interesting in the whole book. It con- 
sists of three parts :—Introduction, Negative Confession, 


INTRODUCTION Ixxxv 


and Concluding Text. The Introduction was said by 
the deceased at the entrance to the Hall of Double 
Maati, the Negative Confession was recited by him 
before the Forty-Two gods who sat in judgment upon 
him in this Hall, and the Concluding Text was uttered 
by him when he had passed the ordeal of judgment 
and was beginning his new life. It is probable that 
these three texts were originally merely versions each 
of the other, but in the XVIIIth Dynasty they are all 
copied together into papyri. The deceased first asserted 
that he had not committed certain sins; he next 
addressed forty-two gods by their names and declared 
before each that he had not committed the special sin 
which it was the duty of the god to punish; and lastly 
he makes a third confession, the first part of which is 
practically in the same words as a portion of the Intro- 
duction. The Introduction provided the passwords 
which enabled him to enter the Hall, and the Conclud- 
ing Text provided those which enabled him to go forth 
from it. The HKgyptian code of morals, as may be seen 
from the CXXVth Chapter, was the grandest and most 
comprehensive of those now known to have existed 
among the nations of antiquity. 

The reader will seek, and seek in vain, for many 
of the attributes of the prayers of Christian nations, 
and it is a noticeable fact that the Egyptian had no 
conception of repentance ; at the Judgment which took 
place in the Hall of Osiris he based his claim for ad- 
mission into the kingdom of that god upon the fact 


Ixxxvi INTRODUCTION 


that he had not committed certain sins, and that he 
had feared God and honoured the king, and had given 
bread to the hungry, drink to the thirsty, clothes to 
the naked, and a boat to him that had suffered ship- 
wreck on the Nile. His belief in the efficacy of works 
was great, and, when he had any doubt about their 
power to deliver him finally from the hosts of dark- 
ness, he protected himself by means of amulets, in- 
scribed or plain, and figures of gods painted upon 
his coffin and papyrus, or cut in wood or on stones, 
which possessed magical powers. The Chapters which 
refer to such amulets are Nos. XIII, XIX., XXXz., 
LXXXIX.,C., OXXV., OXXX., CXXXIDI eee 
CXXXVIs., CXXXVIIa., CXL, CXUTVS ae 
CLVIL., CLVIII., CLIX., CLXII., CLXIIL, CLXIV., 
CLXYV., and CLXVI. 

The CXth Chapter, which describes the employments 
and enjoyments of the deceased in the Sekhet-hetep 
and Sekhet-Aaru, or Elysian Fields, contains ideas of 
the greatest antiquity, which date probably from the 
time when the system of village communities was in 
vogue in Keypt. 

The XVIIth Chapter contains a series of state- 
ments concerning the origin of the gods and the things 
of the next world. To many of these statements more 
than one explanation of their meaning is appended, and 
as these occur in copies of the Chapter which are 
found inscribed upon coffins of the XIth Dynasty, 
it is clear that already at that early date several 


INTRODUCTION Ixxxvii 


opinions on these matters existed. The views ex- 
pressed in the Chapter appear to be those of the an- 
cient College of Priests at Heliopolis which became 
gradually adopted throughout Egypt. 

The LXIVth Chapter was very highly esteemed, 
and it was believed to be one of the oldest parts of 
the Book of the Dead. Already in the XIth Dy- 
nasty it existed in two versions, one of which was 
thought to have been composed or edited in the Ist 
Dynasty, and the other in the [Vth Dynasty.’ It will 
be noticed that several Chapters are called “Chapters 
of Coming Forth by Day,” and among them may be 
specially noticed :—Chapters II. and III., which pro- 
vide that the deceased may come forth in the under- 
world and “live after he hath died, even as doth Ra 
day by day ;” Chapter LXV., which provides that the 
Khu of the deceased shall live and shall inflict blows 
upon his enemy; Chapter LXVI., which gives the 
deceased power to “alight upon the forehead of Ra” ; 
Chapter LXVIII., which gives him mastery over every- 
thing which is in the underworld, and enables him to 
journey about among the living; Chapters LXIX., 
LXX., and LXXI., wherein he identifies himself with 
Osiris, Sah (Orion), Anubis, Horus, and Tem, and 
declares his power over the winds of heaven; Chapter 
LXXIL., which enables him to “come forth by day in 
all the forms which he pleaseth to take,” and to enter 
into an abode in the Elysian Fields, where he shall be 


! See also page xxxiii, 


Ixxxvili INTRODUCTION 


amply provided with wheat and barley; and Chapter 
CLXXX., which enables him to go about in the under- 
world with freedom of movement and to perform all 
the transformations of a “ living soul.” 

An important group of Chapters referring to the 
transformations which a man may undergo, if he 
pleases, in the underworld, is introduced by Chapter 
LXXVI., wherein the deceased declares that he has 
been led unto the “ House of the King” by the mantis, 
the so-called ‘“‘ praying insect.” These Chapters enable 
him to transform himself into a hawk of gold (Chap. 
LXXVILI.), into a divine hawk (Chap. LX XVIIL.), into 
the Governor of the divine sovereign princes (Chap. 
LXXIX.), into the god who giveth light in the dark- 
ness (Chap. LXXX.), into a lotus (Chaps. LXXXIa. 
and LXXXIB.), into the god Ptah and into a living being 
in Annu (Chap. LXXXIL), into a Bennw (phoenix?) 
(Chap. LXXXIII.), into a heron (Chap. LXXXTIV.), 
into a living soul (Chap. LXXXYV.), into a swallow 
(Chap. LXXXVI.), into the serpent Sata (Chap. 
LXXXVIL.), and into a crocodile (Chap. LXXXVIIL.). 

A considerable number of Chapters refer, as we 
should naturally expect, to the preservation of the 
body of the deceased in the tomb, and several were 
expressly written to give him power to resist the at- 
tacks of enemies, and to obtain meat, and drink, and 
the power of motion in the underworld. Thus Chap- 
ter I., which is proved by its title and vignette to 
refer to the ceremonies which took place on the day 


INTRODUCTION Ixxxix 


of the funeral, provides for the burial of the body in 
the proper way so that “the deceased may go in after 
coming forth”; and Chapters VIII., IX., XI., XII, 
Ri eS LVS LX Vile CVITSOXVILKS CXIXS 
CXXII., CLXI, and CLXXX. enable him to make his 
way in the underworld without let or hindrance and to 
overcome his enemies. The deceased wished to pro- 
tect himself by means of magical formulae; Chapter 
XXIV. provides these formulae for him, and Chapter 
XXXII. gives him the power to keep hold of them. 
Chapters XXI. and XXII. give the deceased a mouth, 
and Chapter XXIII. provides him with the power of 
opening it; Chapter XXV. gave him the faculty of 
remembering his name, Seven Chapters (XXVI.— 
XXXB.) gave him a heart, and provided him with 
prayers and formulae, which prevented those who stole 
hearts from snatching it away from him and from driv- 
ing it away from him when it was weighed in the 
Judgment Hall of Osiris. The crocodile, which came 
to steal away the words of power and protection which 
the deceased had with him, was repulsed by the words 
of Chapter XXXI. Chapters XXXIIT., XXXIV., 
XXXV., XXXVI., XXXVI, and XXXIX., prevented 
him from being stung or bitten by snakes and serpents, 
and did away with the power of the beetle (?) 
dpshait to gnaw his body: to pieces. Chapters 
XXXVIIIA. and XXXYVIIIs. enabled him to escape 
from the deadly cobra, and Chapter XL. delivered 
him from the power of the serpent who is devouring 


XC INTRODUCTION 


the Ass and is to be feared. , In the underworld 
and the cities thereof punishment was inflicted on 
the dead, and to provide the favoured of Osiris 
with power to escape from stripes, and wounds, 
and decapitation at the deadly block Chapters XLL, 
XLII, XLIII., and L. were composed. The deceased 
wished for a seat in the celestial Annu (Heliopolis), 
and this was given him by Chapter LXXYV., and 
Chapter XLVII. prevented his throne and his habita- 
tion from being removed by any hostile being. He 
sighed to have power over running water and to snuff 
the sweet breath of the north wind, and these com- 
forts were secured for him by Chapters LIV., LV., 
LVI., LVII., LVIIL, LIX., LX., LXE anges 
the large number of Chapters written for this purpose 
will show how great was the anxiety of the Egyptian 
in this matter. As fire and boiling water existed 
in the underworld, he hastened to protect himself 
from burns or scalds by the use of Chapters LXIIIA. 
and LXIIIs. Proper food was as necessary to the 
ka or double of the deceased as fresh air and water, 
and to ensure it against the need to eat filth and 
drink dirty water, Chapters LII., LIIL, CV., CX., 
CXLVIII. and CLXXXIX. were composed; the 
idea of the ka being obliged to wander about 
starving and in search of food was so abhorrent 
to the pious Egyptian that every text which 
could in any wise help to secure sufficient meat and 
drink for it was gladly copied over and over again. 


INTRODUCTION xci 


The object of Chapters IV., LXXIV., CXVII., CXIX., 
was to enable the deceased to walk about at will, 
and to roam through Re-stau, or the passages of the 
tomb and underworld, and when his way was stopped 
by Apep, Chapter VII. enabled him to pass over the 
back of the fiend. The union of the soul with the 
body was provided for by Chapter LXXXIX., as 
was the escape of the soul and the shade from the 
bonds of the tomb by Chapters XCI. and XCII. 
Though the deceased had no wish to go to the east 
in the underworld (see Chap. XCIII.) he, nevertheless, 
wished to visit the celestial Abydos; a successful 
journey to this city was secured by the use of 
Chapter CXXXVIII. In spite of the best efforts of 
the embalmers bodies sometimes rotted and perished 
in their tombs; such calamities were averted by 
Chapters XLV. and XLVI., and especially by Chapter 
CLIV., which is one of the most interesting in the 
whole book. Overthrow in the underworld was averted 
by the use of Chapter LI., the wrath of the god 
was appeased by Chapter XIV., and the danger of 
dying a second time was done away with by Chapters 
XLIV., CLXXYV., and CLXXVI. The love of ritual 
and ceremony induced the Egyptians to take special 
care about the arrangement of the mummy, and coffin, 
and funeral furniture in the mummy chamber, and 
to make certain that all was properly done in this 
matter, Chapter CLI., which consists of a view of the 
chamber and a group of short but important texts, was 


XCli INTRODUCTION 


composed, ‘The type of this chamber was, of course, 
the tomb of Osiris. The Hall of Osiris, wherein the 
god dwelt with his princes, could only be reached after 
certain doors, and mansions, and domains, which were 
guarded by porters in the form of monsters, had been 
successfully passed through by the deceased ; to enable 
the deceased to go through the seven mansions, 
and the twenty-one pylons, and the fifteen domains, 
Chapters CXLIV.—CXLVII., CXLIX., and CL. were 
written. These provided the deceased with the names 
of the beings who were in charge of the doors, and 
supplied him with the speeches which it was necessary 
that he should make. During his journey in the 
underworld the deceased came to a huge river which 
he was obliged to cross; to enable him to embark in 
the mystical boat, every portion of which possessed 
a name which he was bound to know and be able to 
repeat, he provided himself with Chapters XCVIII. and 
XCIX. But this boat only served to take him across 
the river, and he longed to be able to embark in the 
Boat of Ra, and to sit in its bows and to sail about 
with the god for ever; this delight, however, could 
only be secured for him by means of Chapters C., CL., 
CII, CXXXIV., CXXXVIa., CXXXVIB., and, as a 
result, copies of most of these Chapters exist in nearly 
all large papyri. The Egyptian believed that he 
would encounter the foes who attacked Osiris in the 
underworld, and that the calamities which befel the 
god would come upon him also; he who delivered 


INTRODUCTION XCill 


Osiris out of all his troubles was Thoth, the scribe 
of the gods, and to him were addressed Chapters 
XVIII. and XX., which secured for the deceased 
the protection and triumph which this god had secured 
for “his brother Osiris.” The favour of Thoth 
was so necessary that four Chapters (XCIV., XCV., 
XCVI., XCVII.) were written to instruct the deceased 
to make an offering of a palette and an ink-jar to 
the god, and how to become nigh unto him. Before 
the deceased could roam at wil] in the underworld 
it was necessary that he should know the deities of 
the chief cities of the four quarters of the land wherein 
he was; Chapters CVII. and CVIII. enabled him to 
know the “souls of Amentet” (i.e., of the West), 
Chapter CIX. enabled him to know the “ souls of the 
East,” Chapter CXII. enabled him to know the “souls 
of the city of Pe” {in the north], Chapter CXIII. 
enabled him to know the “souls of the city of Nekhen” 
[in the south], Chapter CXYV. enabled him to know the 
“souls of the city of Annu,” and Chapters CXIV. and 
CXVI. enabled him to know the “souls of the city 
of Khemennu” (Hermopolis). In the underworld the 
deceased was threatened by the danger of the snarer 
or fowler and his net, and Chapters CLIIIA. and 
CLIIIs. were written to enable him to escape from 
them. Two Chapters, CLXIX. and CLXX., provided 
for the stablishing of the funeral bed of the deceased; 
two Chapters, CLXVIIIa. and CLXVIIIz., set out 
at length the libations which it was necessary for 


XCiv INTRODUCTION 


him to pour out; Chapter CXXIII. gave him power 
to enter the “Great House”; Chapters CXXVI., 
CXXVIIL, CXXVIII., CLXXXV., and CLXXXVI. 
supplied him with the prayers which had to be said 
to the holy apes, and to the gods who were the 
leaders and guides in the underworld, and to Osiris 
and Hathor; Chapter CXXXII. enabled him to go 
back to see his house ; Chapter CLII. gave him power 
to build a house upon earth; Chapter CLXXI. pro- 
vided him with a girdle of purity; Chapters CIIL., 
CXXIV., CXXXI., and CLXXXI. gave him power to 
go in before the divine sovereign chiefs of Osiris and 
to be nigh unto Ra; Chapter CIV. gave him a seat 
among the “great gods;” and Chapter CLXXXIV. 
brought him “nigh unto Osiris.” Chapter CXXX., 
which “made perfect the Khu,’ was ordered to be 
recited on the birthday of Osiris; Chapter CX XXIII. 
made the Khu perfect before the Great Company of the 
gods; Chapter CXXXYV., which was to be recited on 
the day of the new moon, gave the deceased power to 
become like unto Thoth; Chapter CXL., which was to 
be recited on the last day of the sixth month of the 
Egyptian year, enabled him to appear in glory before 
all the gods when the ufchat, or Eye of Ra, was full; 
and Chapter CLXVII. conferred upon him the power 
which the wtchat possessed and enabled him to identify 
himself with it. Chapters CXLI. and CXLII. pro- 
vided the texts which a man was directed to recite 
“for his father or for his son during the festival of 


INTRODUCTION XCV 


Amentet,” they made the deceased to be perfect with 
Ra and with the gods; and Chapter CLXXIII. con- 
tained the addresses which Horus made to his father 
Osiris, and which were also assumed to be made to 
the deceased by Horus. Chapter CLXXII. is a remark- 
able and beautiful composition in nine sections, the 
contents of which were first made known in detail 
by M. Naville; in it the limbs of the deceased are 
described in highly poetical language, and the com- 
parisons at times resemble the descriptions of the limbs 
of the beloved one in the Song of Solomon. Four 
Chapters, CLXII., CLXIII., CLXIV., and CLXY., 
have no equivalents in the Recensions of the Book of 
the Dead older than the XXVIth Dynasty, and as 
they contain foreign words and foreign ideas they are 
probably the work of non-Egyptian authors; each of 
them is followed by a long Rubric which orders certain 
curious amulets to be made and the performance of 
ceremonies. In Chapters CLXXIV., CLXXVIL., 
and CLXXVIII. we have extracts from the old 
Heliopolitan Recension of the Book of the Dead which 
was in use in the Vth and VIth Dynasties, and the 
comparison of the texts, which we are now able to 
make, is very instructive. We can see how misunder- 
standings of the meaning of certain passages arose 
through the want of adequate determinatives, and we 
can note how later copyists modified and adapted old 
texts to suit modern views. Thus in the passage from 
the text of Unas (1. 166 ff., see infra, p. 603) we have a 


XCVi INTRODUCTION 


reference to the love-making! of the deceased which is 
entirely omitted from the later copy of it given in the 
Papyrus of Nebseni; and it seems as if the ideas 
expressed in it found no favour with the cultured mind 
of Nebseni, the great designer, draughtsman, and artist, 
who was attached to the Temple of Ptah at Memphis. 
In a similar manner most of the coarse expressions 
and ideas which are found in the religious books of the 
old period have no counterparts in the Theban Recen- 
sion of the Book of the Dead. 

1 M. Maspero’s rendering of the passage (see Les Inscriptions 
des Pyramides de Saqqarah, p. 21) runs :—‘‘O Ra, sois bon pour 
lui en ce jour dés hier; car Ounas a connu la déesse MAouit, 
Ounas a respiré la flamme d’Isi. Ounas s’est uni an lotus, Ounas 
aconnu une jeune femme, mais sa force manquait de grains et de 
liqueurs réconfortantes : lorsque la force d’Ounas a attaqué la jeune 


femme, elle a donné du pain & Ounas, puis elle lui a servi de 
femme en ce jour.” 


THE BOOK OF THE DEAD 


TRANSLATION 


VOL, £, B 


BYMINSs ENT RODUG TORY. 
mete BOOK Or HE SDA: 


Hymn to Ra when he riseth. 


_ [From the Papyrus of Ani (Brit. Mus. No. 10,470, sheet 1).] 


adoration, before a table of offerings consisting of haunches of 

beef, loaves of bread, and cakes, vases of wine and oil, fruits, 

and flowers. He wears a fringed linen garment and has a wig, 

necklace, bracelets, &c. Behind him stands his wife Thuthu, 

a member of the College of Amen-Ra at Thebes; she is similarly 

robed and holds a sistrum, a vine branch, and a mendt, or 
emblem of pleasure, in her hands.! 


Text: (1) A Hymn or Praise To Ra WHEN HE 
RISETH IN THE HASTERN PART OF HEAVEN. Behold 


1 The vignette which accompanies the hymn in the papyrus is 
broken in places; a more perfect one from another section of the 
papyrus is therefore substituted. 


4 INTRODUCTORY HYMNS 


Osiris,! Ani the scribe of the holy offerings of all the 
gods, (2) who saith :— 

‘“ Homage to thee, O thou who hast come as Khepera, 
“ Khepera* the creator of the gods. ‘Thou risest, thou 
“shinest, (3) thou makest light [in] thy mother [the 
“ooddess Nut*]; thou art crowned king of the gods. 
“[Thy] mother Nut doeth an act of homage unto thee 
“with both her hands. (4) The land of Manu? re- 
“ceiveth thee with satisfaction, and the goddess Maat” 
‘“embraceth thee both at morn and at eve. May he 
“ (i.e. Ra) give glory, and power, and triumph, (5) and 
“a coming forth as a living soul to see Heru-khuti® 
. “(i.e., Horus of the two horizons) to the double (ka) * 


! The god who after death and mutilation upon earth rose again 
and became the king of the underworld and judge of the dead; he 
was the type of eternal existence, and the symbol of immortality. 
The deceased pleads the resurrection of this god as the reason for 
his own resurrection, and he always identifies himself with Osiris 
in funereal texts. 

* He is a form of the rising sun, and his seat is in the boat of the 
Sun-god. He is the god of matter which is on the point of passing 
from inertness into life, and also of the dead body from which a 
spiritual and glorified body is about to burst forth. His emblem 
is a beetle. 

%’ The feminine principle of Nu, 7.e., the watery mass out of 
which all the gods were evolved; she is the goddess of the sky, 
across which sailed the boat of the Sun-god. 

1 Manu was the name of the mountain where the sun set in the 
west. 

° The wife of Thoth, and daughter of Ra; she assisted at the 
work of creation. She is the goddess of absolute regularity and 
order, and of moral rectitude, and of right and truth. Her emblem 


is the feather 


5 He isaform of the Sun-god; the words ‘‘two horizons” refer to 
the mountains of Bakhatet and Manu, the most easterly and westerly 
points of the sun’s course, and the places where he rose and set. 


7 The life of the ka LI was sustained by the funeral offerings ; 
its abiding place was the tomb. 


HYMN TO RA 5 


“of Osiris, the scribe Ani, victorious before Osiris, (6) 
“who saith :—Hail, all ye gods of the Temple of the 
“Soul,' who weigh heaven and earth in the balance, 
“and who provide sepulchral meals” in abundance. 
“Hail, Tatunen,* thou One, (7) thou Creator of man- 
“kind and Maker of the substance of the gods of the 
“south and of the north, of the west and of the east. 
“O come and acclaim ye Ra, the lord of heaven, 
“(8) the Prince (Life, Health, Strength!), the Creator 
“of the gods, and adore ye him in his beautiful form 
“at his rising in the Afet* boat. (9) They who dwell 
“in the heights and they who dwell in the depths® 
“worship thee. The god Thoth® and the goddess 
“Maat have written down [thy course] for thee daily 
“and every day. Thine enemy the serpent hath been 
‘“‘oiven over to (10) the fire, the serpent-fiend Sebau 
“hath fallen down headlong; his arms have been 
“bound in chains, and his legs hath Ra hacked off 
“from him. The children of (11) impotent revolt shall 
“never more rise up. The Temple of the Aged One‘ 


1 The name of a part of the sky where the gods lived; a place 
which had a counterpart upon earth, probably at Annu (On, 
Ifeliopolis) and at Tattu (Mendes). 

* T’chefawwas the name given to the food upon which the gods lived, 

° The god of the earth, and one of the oldest gods of Egypt; he 
is sometimes identified with Seb. 

+ A name for the boat of the morning sun. 

® T.e., the gods who live in the heights and depths of heaven, or 
celestial and terrestrial beings. 

6 The divine intelligence which at the creation uttered the words 
which resulted in the formation of the world. He was self-produced, 
and was lord of earth, air, sea, and sky; he was the scribe of the 
gods, and the inventor of all arts and sciences. 

7 T.e., the Temple of Ra at Annu (i.e., On or Heliopolis). 


6 INTRODUCTORY HYMNS 


“keepeth festival, and the voice of those who rejoice is 
“in the mighty dwelling. (12) The gods exult when 
“they see Ra as he riseth, and when his beams flood 
“the world with light. The Majesty (13) of the holy 
“ood goeth forth and advanceth even unto the land of 
“Manu; he maketh brilliant the earth at his birth 
“each day: he journeyeth on to the place where he 
“was yesterday. (14) O be thou at peace with me, 
“and let me behold thy beauties; may I journey forth 
“upon earth, may I smite the Ass;* may I crush 
(15) the serpent-fiend Sebau;* may I destroy Apep * 
“in his hour; may I see the Abfu? fish at his season, 
“and the Ant? fish [piloting] (16) the Ané boat in its . 
“lake. May I see Horus acting as steersman, with 
“the god Thoth and the goddess Maat, one on each 
“side of him; may I grasp the bows of the (17) Sektet 
“boat, and the stern of the Afet boat. May he (ie., 
Ra) grant unto the double (ka) of Osiris Ani to behold 
“the disk of the Sun and to see the Moon-god without 
“ceasing, each and every day; and (18) may my soul 


Or, “thy beautiful form.” 

° We should probably read, ‘‘ May I smite the eater of the Ass,” 
and consider the word ‘‘ eater” to refer to the serpent who is seen 
attacking the Ass in the vignette of Chapter XL. Otherwise 
‘““Ass” must be the name of a fiend of darkness; but then again, 
it must be remembered that ‘‘ Ass” is one of the names of the 
Sun-god. 

3 Sebiau is, in reality, the name of a legion of devils. 

4 The great antagonist of the Sun-god, of which many types are 
known. 

® The name of a mythological fish which, on coffins, &c., is seen 
swimming at the bows of the boat of the Sun-god. 

5 A name for the boat of the setting sun. 


HYMN TO RA 7 


“come forth and walk hither and thither (19) and 
“whithersoever it pleaseth. (20) May my name be 
‘proclaimed (21), and may it be found upon the board 
(22) of the table of offerings ; may offerings (23) be 
‘made unto me in my presence, even as [they are made 
unto] the followers (24) of Horus; may there be made 
“veady for me (25) a seat in the boat of the Sun on the 
“day when (26) the god goeth forth; and may I be 
“yeceived (27) into the presence of Osiris in the land of 
“victory.” 


Hymn to Ra when he riseth. 


[From the Papyrus of Qenna (see Leemans, Papyrus Eyyptiens, 
T. 2, Plate 2).] 


Vignette: Qenna and his wife standing with hands raised in 
adoration. 
Text: (1) A Hymn or Pratsr To RA WHEN HE 
RISETH IN THE EASTERN PART OF HEAVEN. Behold 
Osiris, Qenna the merchant, (2) who saith :— 


“Homage to thee, O Ra, when thou risest [and to 
“thee|,O Temu,' in thy risings of beauty. Thou risest, 
“thou risest, thou shinest, (3) thou shinest, at dawn of 
“day. Thou art crowned king of the gods, and the 
“ooddesses Maati? perform an act of homage unto 
“thee. The company (4) of the gods praise thee from 

1 A form of Ra, and the type of the night sun; he was self- 


’ ereated, and was declared to be the creator of gods and men. 
2 The goddesses Isis and Nephthys are probably referred to bere. 


8 INTRODUCTORY HYMNS 


“the places of sunrise and sunset. Thou passest over 
“the height of heaven and thy heart is filled with 
“gladness. The Sektet boat draweth on, and [Ra] 
“advanceth (5) in the Atet boat with fair winds. Ra 
“rejoiceth, Ra rejoiceth. Thy father is Nu, thy 
“mother is Nut, O (6) thou who art crowned as 
“ Ra-Heru-khuti! (Ra-Harmachis), thy divine boat 
‘“advanceth in peace. [Thine enemy] hath been given 
“over [to the flame, and he] hath fallen ; his head hath 
“been cut off. (7) The heart: of the Lady of Life 
“(i.e., Isis) is glad [because] the foe* of her lord hath 
“fallen headlong. ‘The mariners of Ra have content of 
“heart and Annu (Heliopolis) exulteth.” (8) 

The merchant Qenna, victorious, saith :— 

“T have come to thee, O Lord of the gods, Temu- 
“ Heru-khuti* (Temu-Harmachis) whom Maat directeth 
OD) oan I know that whereby thou dost live.* 
“Grant thou that I may be like unto one of those who 
‘are thy favoured ones (10) [among] the followers of 
“the Great God; may my name be proclaimed, may it 
“be found, may it be set (11) with their [names ?]. 
“The oar[s| have been taken into the Sektet boat, and 
“the boat of the Sun advanceth in peace. (12) May I 
“see Ra when he appeareth in the sky at dawn and 
‘when his Enemy hath fallen at the block. (13) May 


1 A form of the rising sun. 

2 T.e., Apep (see p. 6, note 4). 

3 T.e., the forms of the Sun-god in the evening and morning. 

4 The gods live by madt, i.e., never-failing and unalterable 
regularity and order. 


HYMN TO RA 9 


“T see Horus working the rudder on each side and 
“bringing along the boat. May I see the Absu fish at 
“Tits] time of (14) coming into being (?); may I see 
“the Ant fish as it becometh the pilot of the Ant boat 
“in its waters. O thou only One, O thou Perfect One, 
“OQ thou (15) who dost endure, who sufferest never an 
“evil moment, who canst not be smitten down by him 
“that doeth deeds of might, none other shall have 
“power and might over the things which belong to 
“thee. (16) None shall obtain by fraud possession of 
“the things which belong to the divine Father, who 
“hath need of abundance, the tongue (?) of veneration, 
(17) the lord of Abtu (Abydos).” 

The merchant Qenna, victorious, saith: ‘“ Homage 
“to thee, O Heru-khuti-Temu Heru (18) Khepera,! 
“thou mighty hawk, who makest glad the body |of 
“man], thou beautiful of face by reason of thy two 
“oreat plumes! Awake, (19) O lord of beauty, at 
“dawn when the company of the gods and mortals say 
“unto thee, ‘Hail!’ They (20) sing hymns of praise 
“unto thee at eventide, and the starry deities also 
“adore thee. O thou firstborn, who dost lie motionless 
“(21), thy mother sheweth loving-kindness unto thee 
“daily. Ra liveth, and the serpent-fiend Nak? is dead ; 
“thou art in good case, for thine enemy (22) hath fallen 
“headlong. Thou sailest over heaven with life and 


! T.e., Harmachis-Tem-Horus-Khepera, or four forms of the 
Sun-god. 
2 An active opponent of the Sunagod. 


10 INTRODUCTORY HYMNS 


“streneth. ‘The goddess Nehebka! is in the A fet boat, 
“and thy boat rejoiceth ; (23) thy heart is glad, and 
“the two uraei goddesses rise upon thy brow.” 


Hymn to Ra when he riseth. 


[From the Papyrus of Qenna (see Leemans, Papyrus Egyptiens, 
T. 2, Plate 4). | 


Vignette : Qenna and his wife standing with hands raised in 
adoration. 


Text: (1) A Hymn or Prais—E TO RA WHEN HE 
RISETH IN THE HASTERN PART OF HEAVEN. Behold 
Osiris, Qenna the merchant, victorious? (2) who 
saith :— 


“Homage to thee, O thou who risest in Nu, and 
“who at thy manifestation dost make the world bright 
“with light; the whole company of gods sing hymns 
‘of praise unto thee after thou hast come forth. 
(3) The divine Merti* who minister unto thee 


' lhe goddess of matter revivified. 

2 The words rendered ‘‘ victorious” are iad kheru, and mean, 
literally, “right” (mad) and “‘ word,” or, ‘‘ voice” (kherw). They 
indicate a belief on the part of the writer that the deceased by 
means of the ceremonies which have been performed, and the 
words which have been said, on his behalf, has satisfactorily 
passed the ordeal of judgment, and has attained to a state of 
knowledge which will enable him to utter commands, whatever 
they may be, in such a manner as will cause them to be carried 
out by those to whom they are addressed, whether gods or devils. 

* T.e., the ‘* Two Eyes,” a name given to the goddesses Isis and 
Nephthys who, in the form of two serpents, have their places on 
the head of the Sun-god. . 


HYMN TO RA Ey 


“cherish thee as King of the North and South, thou 
“beautiful and beloved Man-child. When thou risest, 
“men and women live. (4) The nations rejoice in 
“thee, and the Souls of Annu (Heliopolis) sing unto 
“thee songs of joy. (5) The souls of the cities of 
“Pe! and Nekhen? exalt thee, the apes of dawn adore 
“thee, and (6) all beasts and cattle praise thee with 
“one accord. The goddess Seba overthroweth thine 
“enemies, therefore rejoice thou within (7) thy boat; 
“thy mariners are content thereat. Thou hast attained 
“unto the Atet boat, and thy heart swelleth with joy. 
“O lord of the gods, when thou didst create (8) them 
“they ascribed unto thee praises. The azure goddess 
“Nut doth compass thee on every side, and the god 
“Nu* (9) floodeth thee with his rays of light. O cast 
“thou thy light upon me and let me see thy beauties, 
“me the Osiris (10) Qenna the merchant, victorious, 
“and when thou goest forth over the earth I will sing 
“praises unto thy fair face. Thou risest in heaven’s 
“horizon, (11) and [thy] disk is adored [when] it 
“vesteth upon the mountain to give life unto the 
“ world.” 

_ Saith Qenna the merchant, victorious: (12) “Thou 
“yisest, thou risest, and thou comest forth from the 
“god Nu. Thou dost renew thy youth and thou dost 
“set thyself in the place where thou wast yesterday. 


1 T.e., Buto, a city in the Delta. 

2 A very ancient city in Upper Egypt, supposed to be near 
Hileithyiapolis. 

3 Nu is here regarded as the god of the sky. 


I2 INTRODUCTORY HYMNS 


“OQ divine youth who hast created thyself, (18) I am 
“not able [to describe] thee. Thou hast come with 
“thy diadems,' and thou hast made heaven and earth 
“bright with thy rays of pure emerald light. (14) The 
“land of Punt? is stablished [to give] the perfumes 
“which thou smellest with thy nostrils. Thou risest, 
“QO marvellous Being,* (15) in heaven, the two serpent- 
‘“ooddesses Merti are stablished upon thy brow, and 
“thou art the giver of laws, O lord of the world and of 
“the inhabitants thereof; (16) all the gods and Qenna 
“the merchant, victorious, adore thee.” 


Hymn to Ra when he riseth. 


[From the Papyrus of Hu-nefer (Brit. Mus. No. 9901, sheet 1). ] 


Text: (1) A Hymn or Pratse TO RA WHEN HE 
RISETH IN THE (2) EASTERN PART OF HEAVEN. Behold 
Osiris, Hu-nefer, (3) victorious, who saith :— 

“Homage to thee, O thou who art Ra when thou 
“risest (4) and Temu when thou settest. Thou risest, 
“thou risest, thou shinest, thou shinest, (5) thou who 


1 Or, ‘‘in thy rising.” 

° A district situated near the most easterly part of Somali land, 
which was famous in antiquity as the home of the spice and 
incense trees. 

3 Or, ‘* Being of iron.” According to one view, the floor of 
heaven consisted of an iron plate through holes in which the lamps 
of the stars were hung out. 


HYMN TO RA 13 


“art crowned king of the gods. Thou art the lord of 
“heaven, [thou art] the lord of earth; [thou art] the 
“creator of those who dwell (6) in the heights and of 
“those who dwell in the depths. [Thou art] the God 
“One who came into being (7) in the beginning of 
“time, Thou didst create the earth, thou didst fashion 
“man, (8) thou didst make the watery abyss of the 
“sky, thou didst form Hapi,? thou didst create the 
“watery abyss, (9) and thou dost give life unto all that 
“therein is. Thou hast knit together the mountains, 
“thou hast made (10) mankind and the beasts of the 
“field to come into being, thou hast made the heavens 
“and the earth. Worshipped be thou whom the 
“goddess Maat embraceth at morn and at eve.. Thou 
“dost travel across the sky with heart swelling with 
“joy; the Lake of Testes* (11) becometh contented 
“thereat. The serpent-fiend Nak hath fallen and his 
“two arms are cut off. The Sektet boat receiveth fair 
“winds, and the heart of him that is in the shrine 
“thereof rejoiceth. Thou art crowned (12) Prince of 
“heaven, thou art the One dowered [with all sove- 
“reionty| who comest forth from the sky. Ra is 
“victorious! O thou divine youth, thou heir ot 
“everlastingness, thou self-begotten one, O thou who 


1 Or, ‘‘creator of the starry gods in heaven above and of the 
dwellers upon earth below.” 

2 T.e., the god of the Nile, who was worshipped under two forms, 
Ilapi of the South, and Hapi of the North; he is represented as 
a man having the breasts of a woman, which indicate fertility, 
and crowned with lotus and papyrus flowers. 

3 A name of heaven (?). 


14 INTRODUCTORY HYMNS 


“didst give thyself birth! O One (13), mighty [one], 
“of myriad forms and aspects, king of the world, 
“Prince of Annu (Heliopolis), lord of eternity and 
“ruler of everlastingness,'! the company of the gods 
“yejoice when thou risest and when thou sailest - 
“(14) across the sky, O thou who art exalted in the 
“ Sektet boat.” 

“Homage to thee, 0 Amen-Ra, who dost rest upon 
“Maat,” and who passest over the heaven, every face 
“seeth thee. Thou dost wax great (15) as thy Majesty 
“doth advance, and thy rays are upon all faces. Thou 
“art unknown and no tongue is worthy (?) to declare 
“thy likeness; only thou thyself [canst do this]. Thou 
“art One, even as is he (16) that bringeth the fena 
“basket. Men praise thee in thy name [Ra], and they 
“swear by thee, for thou art lord over them. Thou 
“hearest with thine ears and thou seest with thine 
“eyes, (17) Millions of years have gone over the 
“world; I cannot tell the number of those through 
“which thou hast passed. Thy heart hath decreed a 
“day of happiness in thy name of‘ Traveller.” Thou 
“dost pass over (18) and dost travel through untold 
‘spaces [requiring] millions and hundreds of thousands 
“of years [to pass over]; thou passest through them in 
‘peace, and thou steerest thy way across the watery 
‘abyss to the place which thou lovest; this thou doest 

1 Or, ‘‘ who endurest through everlastingness.” 

* I.e., “thou whose existence and whose risings and settings 


are ordered and defined by fixed, unchanging, and unalterable 
laws.” 


HYMN TO RA 15 


“in one (19) little moment of time, and then thou dost 
“sink down and dost make an end of the hours.” 

Behold Osiris, the governor of the palace of the lord 
of the two lands,' Hu-nefer, victorious, saith: (20) 
“Hail, my lord, thou who passest through eternity, 
“whose being is everlasting. Hail, thou Disk, lord of 
“beams of light, thou risest and thou makest all man- 
“kind to live. Grant thou that I may behold thee at 
“dawn each day.” 


Hymn to Ra when he riseth. 
[From the Papyrus of Nekht (Brit. Mus. No. 10,471, sheet 21).] 


Text: A Hymn or Praise To Ra by Nekht, the 
royal scribe, the captain of soldiers, who saith :— 

“ Homage to thee, O thou glorious Being, thou who 
“art dowered [with all sovereignty]. O Tem Heru-khuti 
“ (‘Tem-Harmachis), when thou risest in the horizon of 
“heaven, a cry of joy cometh forth to thee from the 
“mouth of all peoples. O thou beautiful Being, thou 
“dost renew thyself in thy season in the form of the 
“Disk within thy mother Hathor;* therefore in every 
“place every heart swelleth with joy at thy rising, for 

1 The king here referred to is Seti I., who began to reign about 
B.C. 1870, 


2 The goddess of those portions of the sky in which the sun rose 
and set. 


16 INTRODUCTORY HYMNS 


“ever. The regions of the North and South come to 
“thee with homage, and send forth acclamations at thy 
“yising in the horizon of heaven; thou illuminest the 
“two lands with rays of turquoise light. O Ra, thou 
“who art Heru-khuti (Harmachis), the divine man- 
“child, the heir of eternity, self-begotten and self-born, 
“king of earth, prince of the Tuat,! governor of the 
“reoions of Aukert;? thou comest forth from the 
“water, thou hast sprung from the god Nu, who 
“cherisheth thee and ordereth thy members. O thou 
“ood of life, thou lord of love, all men live when thou 
“shinest; thou art crowned king of the gods, The 
“ooddess Nut doeth homage unto thee, and the goddess 
“Maat embraceth thee at all times. Those who are in 
“thy following sing unto thee with joy and bow down 
“their foreheads to the earth when they meet thee, 
“thou lord of heaven, thou lord of earth, thou king of 
“Right and Truth, thou lord of eternity, thou prince 
“of everlastingness, thou sovereign of all the gods, 
“thou god of life, thou creator of eternity, thou maker 
“of heaven wherein thou art firmly established! The 
“company of the gods rejoice at thy rising, the earth is 
“olad when it beholdeth thy rays; the peoples that 
“have been long dead come forth with cries of joy to 
“see thy beauties every day. Thou goest forth each 
‘“‘day over heaven and earth and art made strong each 

1 The name of a district or region, neither in heayen nor upon 
earth, where the dead dwelt, and through which the sun passed 


during the night. 
2 A name of the underworld. 


HYMN TO RA 17 


“day by thy mother Nut. Thou passest through the 
“heights of heaven, thy heart swelleth with joy; and 
“the Lake of Testes! is content thereat. The Serpent- 
“fiend hath fallen, his arms are hewn off, the knife 
“hath cut asunder his joints. Ra liveth by Madt®* the 
“beautiful. The Sektet boat draweth on and cometh 
“into port; the South and the North, the West and 
“the Hast turn to praise thee, O thou primeval 
“substance of the earth who didst come into being of 
“thine own accord. Isis* and Nephthys‘ salute thee, 
“they sing unto thee songs of joy at thy rising in the 
“boat, they protect thee with their hands. The souls 
“of the East follow thee, the souls of the West praise 
“thee. Thou art the ruler of all the gods and thou 
“hast joy of heart within thy shrine; for the serpent- 
“fiend Nak hath been condemned to the fire, and thy 
“heart shall be joyful for ever. Thy mother Nut is 
“adjudged to thy father Nu.” 


1 A name of heaven (?). 

2 T.e., ‘‘ Ra liveth by unchanging and eternal law and order.” 

3-The daughter of Seb and Nut, the wife of Osiris, and the 
mother of Horus. 

4 The daughter of Seb and Nut, the wife of Set, the sister of 
Isis and Osiris, and the mother of Anubis. 


VOL. I. ae o 


18 INTRODUCTORY HYMNS 


Hymn to Osiris Un-nefer. 


[From the Papyrus of Ani (Brit. Mus. No. 10,470, sheet 2).] 


Vignette: The scribe Ani standing, with both hands raised 
in adoration, before a table of offerings consisting of haunches 
of beef, loaves of bread and cakes, vases of wine and oil, fruits 
and flowers, &c. He wears a double linen garment and a wig, 
bracelets, &c. Behind him stands his wife Thuthu, a member 
of the College of Amen-Ra at Thebes; she is similarly robed 

and holds a sistrum, a vine branch, and a mendt in her hands. 


Text: (1) “Glory be to Osiris Un-nefer, the great 
“god within Abtu (Abydos), king of eternity, lord of 
‘“everlastingness, who passeth through millions of years 


“in his existence. Eldest son of the (2) womb of Nut, 
“engendered by Seb! the Erpat,* lord of the crowns of 


! He was the son of Shu and Tefnut, husband of Nut, and father by 
her of Osiris, Isis, Set, Nephthys, and Horus dwelling in darkness. 
2 T.e., the great ancestor of the tribe of the gods. 


HYMN TO OSIRIS UN-NEFER 19g 


ed North and South, lord of the lofty white crown: 
‘as prince of gods and of men (3) he hath received the 
“crook, and the whip, and the dignity of his divine 
“fathers. Let thy heart, which is in the Mountain of 
“ Ament,' be content, for thy son Horus is established 
“upon thy throne. (4) Thou art crowned lord of 
“Tattu® and ruler in Abtu (Abydos). Through thee 
“the world waxeth green in (5) triumph before the might 
“of Neb-er-tcher.? He leadeth in his train that which 
“jis, and that which is not yet, in his name of ‘ Ta-her- 
“(6) sta-nef’;* he toweth along the earth by Maat in 
“his name of ‘Seker’;° he is exceedingly mighty (7) 
“and most terrible in his name ‘ Osiris’; ° he endureth 
“for ever and for ever’ in his name of ‘ Unnatee: vs 
(8) “Homage to thee, King of kings, Lord of lords, 
“Prince of princes, who from the womb of Nut hast 
“ruled (9) the world and Akert.* Thy body is of 
“bright and shining metal, thy head is of azure blue, 
“and the brilliance of the turquoise encircleth thee. 
1 The ‘‘hidden” place, or abode of the dead, which was usually 
situated on the left or western bank of the Nile. 


2 Two cities in Egypt bore the name ‘‘ Tattu,” viz., Busiris and 
Mendes. 

3 T.e., the “lord of all.” In the Book of the Dead Osiris is fre- 
quently called by this name, the allusion being to the complete 
reconstruction of his body after it had been hacked to pieces by 
Set. 

4 A name meaning something like ‘‘ he leadeth the earth.” 

5 A play on the sounds of the words sek, ‘‘to pull along,” and 
seker, ‘‘ he who is coffined,” is here intended. 

SA play on the sounds of the words user, “strong,” and Ausar, 
‘ Osiris,” is here intended. 

7 A play on the words wn, ‘‘ to exist,” and wn in the proper name 
“Un-nefer” is here intended. 

8 A name of the underworld. 


20 INTRODUCTORY HYMNS 


“© god An! of millions of years, (10) all-pervading with 
“thy body and beautiful in countenance in Ta-tchesert,” 
“orant thou to the Ka (i.e., double) of Osiris, the scribe 
‘Ani, splendour in heaven, and might upon earth, and 
“triumph in the underworld; and grant that I may 
“sail down (11) to Tattu like a (12) living soul and up 
“to (13) Abtu (Abydos) like a Bennw* bird; and that 
“T may go in and come out (14) without repulse at the 
“pylons * (15) of the lords of the underworld. May 
“there be given unto me (16) loaves of bread in the 
“house of coolness, and (17) offerings of food in Annu 
(Heliopolis), and a homestead (18) for ever in 
“ Sekhet-Aru® with wheat and barley therefor.” 


A form of the Sun-god; he is mentioned again in Chapter XV. 
A name of the underworld. 

3 The Bennu is commonly identified with the phoenix. 

4 For the twenty-one pylons of the House of Osiris see 
Chapter CXLY. 

5 A division of the Sekhet-Hetepu or ‘Elysian Fields,” for 
which see Chapter CX. 


moe 


21 


(Lt Pe UDG iV EON I 


THE Judgment Scene, of which a description is here 
given, forms a very important section of the Book of 
the Dead as contained in papyri of the XVIIIth, 
XITXth, and following Dynasties. It follows the two 
or more hymns with which a large papyrus opens, and 
seems to occupy a suitable place, and to form a fitting 
introduction to the selections of the chapters of Coming 
Forth by Day which follow it. These chapters refer to 
and deal with the events which took place in the life of 
the deceased, who has succeeded in entering the realm 
of Osiris, the god of the dead, but they, of necessity, 
were absolutely useless to any one who had not passed 
the judgment and been permitted by this god to enter 
his dominions. Those who were condemned in the 
judgment were devoured straightway by the Hater of 
the Dead, and ceased to exist. The Judgment Scene, 
as given in the large papyri, seems to have been 
developed from the vignette which illustrates one of 
the Chapters of the Heart (XXXz.), in which special 
reference is made to the weighing of the heart, or from 
one which, properly speaking, belonged to the CXX Vth 
Chapter. Where and when the judgment took place is 
unknown, but the original idea seems to have been 


22 THE JUDGMENT 


that the broad heavens, or a certain portion of them, 
formed the Judgment Hall, and that the judgment took 
place in the presence of the three Companies of the 
gods; as fhe head of the funereal Company Osiris 
occupied a very prominent position, and he eventually 
became the sole judge of the dead. The judgment of 
each individual seems to have taken place soon after 
death, and annihilation or everlasting life and bliss to 
have been decreed at once for the souls of the dead; 
there are no sufficient grounds for assuming that the 
ligyptians believed either in a general resurrection, or 
in protracted punishment. How far they thought that 
the prayers of the living for the dead were efficacious 
in arresting or modifying the decree of doom cannot be 
said, but very considerable importance was attached by 
them to funeral prayers and ceremonies in all ages, and 
there is no doubt that they were the outcome of the 
firm belief that they would result in the salvation and 
well-being of the souls of the dead. 


The Scene of the Weighing of the 
Heart of the Dead. 


[From the Papyrus of Ani (Brit. Mus. No. 10,470, plates 3 and 4). ] 


Vignette: The scribe Ani and his wife Thuthu enter the 
Hall of Double Maat, wherein the heart, symbolic of the con- 
science, is to be weighed in the balance against the feather, 
emblematical of Right and Truth. In the upper register are 
the gods who sit in judgment, whose names are “ Harmachis, 
the great god in his boat, Temu, Shu, Tefnut the lady of heaven, 


THE JUDGMENT. 


Isis. 


Seb. Tefnut. Shu. Temu. Harmachis. 


Nut. 


Nephthys. 


Huand Sa. Hathor. Horus. 


| FEPEMI MEE hI 


i 


(MS NES 


eal 


dre tle = 18) oe 
SSSI LEIA Ch 


ar) 


) 
eu ia =r | 


Thoth. The ‘‘ Hater of the Dead.” 


of Maat. 


Anubis, The feather 


The 
heart. Luck. 


Meskhenet. Ani’s 


Renenet. 


Ani and his wife Thuthu. 


THE JUDGMENT 25 


Seb, Nut the lady of heaven, Isis, Nephthys, Horus the great 
god, Hathor the lady of Amenta, Hu and Sa.” On the standard 
of the scales sits the dog-headed ape, the companion of Thoth, 
the scribe of the gods; and the god Anubis, jackal-headed, 
tests the tongue of the balance. On the left of the balance, 
facing Anubis are:—(1) Ani’s “Luck”; (2) the Meskhen or 
“cubit with human head,’ thought by some to be connected 
with the place of birth; (8) the goddesses Meskhenet and 
Renenet who presided over the birth, birth-place, and early 
education of children; and (4) the soul of Ani in the form of a 
human-headed bird standing on a pylon. On the right of the 
balance, behind Anubis, stands Thoth, the scribe of the gods, 
who holds in his hands his reed-pen and palette with which to 
record the result of the trial. Behind Thoth stands the monster 
called either Amam, the “Devourer,” or Am-mit, the “Eater 
of the Dead.” 


Text: Osiris, the scribe Ani, saith :— 

“My! heart my mother, my heart my mother, my 
“heart my coming into being. May there be nothing 
“to resist me at [my] judgment; may there be no 
“opposition to me from the T'chatcha;* may there be 
“no parting of thee from me in the presence of him 
“that keepeth the scales. Thou art my Ka (7.e., double) 
“within my body [which] knitteth together and 
“strengtheneth my limbs. Mayest thou come forth 
“to the place of happiness to which I am advancing. 
“May the Shenit* not cause my name to stink, 
“and may no lies be spoken against me in the 

1 This speech of Ani is actually Chapter XXXz. (q.v.), but the 
last line has been omitted by the scribe for want of room. 

2 T.e., the ‘*‘ Heads” or “Chiefs.” The Tchatcha of Osiris were 


Mestha, api, Tuamautef and Qebhsennuf,. 
3 T.e., divine officials. 


26 THE JUDGMENT 


“presence of the god. Good, good is it for thee to 
Se DORI. tay en 

Thoth, the judge of Right and Truth of the great 
company of the gods who are in the presence of 
Osiris, saith :—‘‘ Hear ye this judgment. The heart of 
“Osiris hath in very truth been weighed, and his soul 
“hath stood as a witness for him; it hath been found 
“true by trial in the Great Balance. There hath not 
“been found any wickedness in him; he hath not 
“wasted the offerings in the temples; he hath not 
‘done harm by his deeds; and he hath uttered no evil 
“yeports while he was upon earth.” 

The great company of the gods reply to Thoth who 
dwelleth in Khemennu (Hermopolis) :—‘‘That which 
“cometh forth from thy mouth shall be declared true. 
“Osiris, the scribe Ani victorious, is holy and righteous. 
‘“ He hath not sinned, neither hath he done evil against 
“us. It shall not be allowed to the devourer Amemet 
“to prevail over him. Meat-offerings and entrance 
‘into the presence of the god Osiris shall be granted 
“unto him, together with a homestead for ever in 
‘“Sekhet-hetepu,! as unto the followers of Horus.” 


Vignette: The scribe Ani is led by Horus, the son of Isis, 
into the presence of Osiris who is enthroned within a shrine in 
the form of a funeral chest. Osiris has upon his head the Atef 
crown, and he holds in his hands the crook, the seceptre and 
the whip, emblematic of authority, dominion, and sovereignty ; 
from his neck hangs the mendt. His title here is “ Osiris, the 


1 See Chapter CX. 


THE JUDGMENT. 


{ 
=" 


= NYY Sebi IAIN] Sap 


Se = a RU Scie 
| SSPSIINET oh 


i=) 
n 
o 
ee 
s 
3 
iss) 


phthys, 


rus. 


Osiris in his shrine, with Isis, Ne 
and the!four children of Hor 


Ani kneeling in adoration 
before Osiris 


THE DECEASED IS LED IN BEFORE OSIRIS 29 


lord of everlastingness.” Behind him stand Nephthys, his 
sister, on his right hand and Isis, his sister and wife, on his 
left. Before him, standing on a lotus flower, are the gods of 
the cardinal points or, as they are sometimes called, “the 
Children of Horus” and “Children of Osiris.” The first, 
Mestha, has the head of a man; the second, Hapi, the head of 
an ape; the third, Tuamautef, the head of a jackal; and the 
fourth, Qebhsennuf, the head of a hawk. Near the lotus hangs 
the skin of an animal. The side of the throne of Osiris is 
painted to resemble that of a funeral chest. The roof of the 
' shrine is supported on pillars with lotus capitals, and is sur- 
mounted by a figure of Horus-Sept or Horus-Seker, and by 
rows of uraei. The pedestal on which the shrine rests is in 
the form of the hieroglyphic which is emblematic of Madt or 
“Right and Truth.” Before the shrine is a table of offerings 
by which, on a reed mat, kneels Ani with his right hand raised 
in adoration ; in the left hand he holds the Kherp sceptre. He 
wears on his head a whitened wig and the so-called “ cone,” the 
signification of which is unknown. 


Text: (1) Saith Horus the son of Isis: “I have 
“come to thee, O Un-nefer, and I have brought unto 
“thee the Osiris Ani. His heart is [found] righteous, 
(2) and it hath come forth from the balance; it hath 
“not sinned against any god or any goddess, Thoth 
“hath weighed it according to the decree pronounced 
“(3) unto him by the company of the gods; and it is 
“most true and righteous. Grant that cakes and ale 
“may be given unto him, and let him appear in the 
“presence of the god Osiris; (4) and Jet him be like 
“unto the followers of Horus for ever and for ever.” 

(1) And Osiris Ani (2) saith : “Behold, I am in thy 
“presence, O lord of (3) Amentet. There is no sin in 
“my (4) body. Ihave not spoken that which is not 


30 VARIANT DETAILS OF THE JUDGMENT SCENE 


“true (5) knowingly, nor have I done aught with a 
“false heart. Grant thou that I may be like unto 
“those favoured ones who are in thy following, (6) and 
“that I may be an Osiris greatly favoured of the 
“Deautiful god, and beloved of the lord of the world. 
‘“{I] who am, indeed, a royal scribe who loveth thee, 
‘Ani, victorious before the god Osiris.” 


The details of the Judgment Scene vary considerably 
in the papyri of different periods, and it seems as if 
every scribe or artist felt himself free to follow out his 
own ideas of its treatment. First, as regards the Great 
Balance. The beam is always exactly horizontal, a 
fact which proves that the Egyptian was only asked to 
make his heart or conscience to just counterbalance, 
and not outweigh the feather of Maat. The pillar of 
the Balance is at times (see pp. 23 and 32) surmounted 
by the ape of Thoth, at others by the head of Maat (see 
p- 81), at others by the head of Anubis (see p. 31), and 
at others by the head of Thoth himself. The feather 
of Maat, i, which is in one pan of the scales, is often 
exchanged for the figure of the goddess herself 
(see p. 32). The actual weighing of the heart is 
performed sometimes by Anubis (see pp. 31, 32), and 
sometimes by Maat (see p. 31); usually the deceased 
enters the Hall of Judgment alone or accompanied by 
his wife, but sometimes he is led in by Anubis, and 
sometimes by a dog-headed god who carries a knife in 
his left hand. The Eater of the Dead sometimes sits, 


Fr Wye 

CPT ai 

ele Bt 2g 

32 

Vin 7 
rN 


cS 4 
ail 
a THETA | 


< Ss 
To} 


= = 


The Weighing of the Heart. (From the Papyrus of Qenna,) 


‘ , >. 
2 7 Y/ pez Se Guile 


fae laseele. 


The Weighing of the Heart (from the Papyrus of Anhai), 


THE VIGNETTE OF THE JUDGMENT SCENE 33 


and sometimes stands by the side of the pillar of the 
Balance; in the Papyrus of Hu-nefer (see p. 31) a 
description of her appears above her head, thus :— 
“Am-mit, her forepart [is that of] crocodiles, her hind- 
“part [is that of a] hippopotamus, and her middle [is 
“that of a] lion.” In details the Judgment Scene as 
given in the Papyrus of Ani is very full (see p. 23), and 
very few papyri contain the “ Luck” and the nursing 
goddesses Meskhenet and Renenet in human form. 
The arrangement of one part of the Scene in the 
Papyrus of Anhai (see p. 82) is most unusual. In the 
upper register we have the Great and Little Companies 
of the gods arranged facing each other; the former 
contains five gods and the latter six. Now a pawt, or 
Company of gods, rarely contained less than nine gods, 
though often more. Hach Company is seated before a 
meagre table of offerings. Below these gods are two 
human-headed objects which are called respectively 
Shai and Renenet ; each has the head of a woman, but 
one, Shai, should have.had that of a man, and a beard. 
It is noteworthy that the Kater of the Dead is not seated 
by Anubis, and that the god Anubis grasps one of the 
cords by which the pan of the Balance that contains 
the heart is suspended, as if to steady the beam. The 
text above the head of Anubis is unusual (see also the 
Scene from the Papyrus of Ani, p. 25), and contains an 
exhortation addressed to the ape of Thoth seated on 
the top of the pillar, that this god will give his careful 
attention to the correct weighing of the heart of the 
VOL. I. D 


34 THE VIGNETTE OF THE JUDGMENT SCENE 


deceased in the Balance. The text above the Hater of 
the Dead is a prayer by the deceased, who entreats the 
god, saying, “ Set my heart upon the throne of right in 
the presence of the Great God.” The result of the 
weighing of the heart is always noted by Thoth, who 
records it upon his palette. The deceased is sometimes 
led into the presence of Osiris by Horus, the son of 
Isis, and sometimes by Anubis. In papyri wherein the 
the vignettes are not very elaborate, Osiris stands or 
sits in his shrine alone, but in fully illustrated papyri 
he is accompanied by Isis and Nephthys, and by the 
four children of Horus, who stand on a lotus flower 
(see pp. 27, 35). The stem of this flower springs from 
out of the waters of a lake, whereon the throne of 
Osiris is placed (see the following illustration from the 
Papyrus of Hu-nefer); this lake was fed by the celestial 
Nile, or by one of its branches, and was the source 
whence the beatified, as well as the gods, drank. This 
scene is of considerable interest from the point of view 
of comparative -mythology, for many Semitic writers 
held the opinion that the throne of the deity was placed, 
or rested upon, a stream of water, or a river. Even in 
the Book of Revelation we have a reference to a “pure 
river of water, clear as crystal, proceeding out of the 
throne of God” (see chapter xxii. 1). 


Pa mena at 
ain pa A AY 
CENCE BERETA EEE 


Teds eae ReTebe Be lsTC Le BOM WB be a1 


5 Race Pe OUT oD TeTC OTT OOpPLONTG F 


be) 


”, 
aes 
3 


ye yf 
: 
Se 


Mon 


a 


mp 
LT aa ~ 


t) Wy wx 
ef i >> 


a! 
red 


ee 


Ky DORON 

RL I] 

TI TARGA ORS HE NPR ROR MMOR AAA AAU UO EH 0 
= —— re Ts =o Peal | 


i SS oa! eS 
a a en ee 


The god Osiris seated in his shrine :n the Hall of Judgment, 
(From the Papyrus of Hu-nefer,) 


Tors GHAPTERS 


OF 


GOMING FORTH? bY sDAY 


*quio} 944 Jo quoay ut AUTUIMUT 
04} el0jaq seTuoUIeI90 Surm10j10ed 
PUB SOIALOS [BIOUN}S OY} SuUIpVas Sysortg "QOUMOBS LOJ STRUT “TOTO SUIdIe MA “SS ul1eyO SurrBeq wsyy 


Bi \ ir? i i m 
Ag | bs ye 
eX 


nd 
an 
ry 
ai 


It 
Ul 


‘NOISSHOOUd TVUHNONA AHL 


39 


CHAPTER I. 
[From the Papyrus of Ani (Brit. Mus. No. 10,470, sheets 5 and 6). ] 


Vignettes: The funeral procession to the tomb, and the 
ceremony thereat, are here depicted. The mummy of the . 
deceased, lying in a funeral chest placed in a boat, is being 
drawn along by oxen: figures of the goddesses Nephthys 
and Isis stand at the head and foot respectively. By the 
side kneels the wife of the deceased. In front of the boat 
stands the Sem priest, dressed in a panther’s skin, burning 
incense and sprinkling water, and behind follow eight male 
mourners; in the rear are servants drawing a small funeral 
chest surmounted by a figure of Anubis, and carrying vases of 
unguents along with the couch, staff, chair, palette, &c., of the 
deceased. Preceding the oxen drawing the funeral boat are 
men carrying on yokes boxes of flowers, vases of unguents, &c., 
and a group of wailing women with uncovered heads and 
breasts, who smite their heads and faces in token of grief. 
Close by stand a cow and her calf, intended to be slaughtered 
for the funeral feast, and tables loaded with offerings of herbs, 
fruits, &c. At the door of the tomb stands the god of the 
dead, Anubis, clasping the mummy of the deceased, before 
which kneels the weeping wife. Ata table of funeral offerings 
stand two priests. One, the Sem priest, wears a panther’s skin 
and holds in his hand a libation vase and censer; the other 
holds in his right hand the instrument uR HEKA! in the form 
of a ram-headed serpent, the head of which is surmounted by 
an uraeus, and in his left hand an instrument in the shape of 
an adze*“—,. With the former he is about to touch the mouth 


1 T.e., the “ mighty one of enchantments,” 


40 THE BOOK OF THE DEAD (Chap. i. 


and eyes of the mummy, and with the latter the mouth. On 
the ground, by their side, lie the instruments which are to be 
employed in the ceremony of opening the mouth, ze, the 
ceremony which will give the deceased the power to eat, and 
to drink, and to talk in the next world, namely the Meskhet 
LQ, the group of instruments in the form of adzes (\~, the 
Pesh-en-kef WA the libation vases, the boxes of purification, 
the bandlet, the feather, &c. Behind them stands the “ Reader,” 
who recites the funeral service from a papyrus roll, and to the 
rear is a ministrant who holds the haunch of beef which is to 
be used in the ceremony at the door of the tomb, 


FUNERAL CEREMONIES AT THE TOMB. 


Abit 


RR, 
rm 


{ 


h 


In the upper register we see the tomb in the Theban hills, with a sepulchral 

stele inscribed with prayers by the deceased. Anubis supports the mummy, 

before which kneel Hu-nefer’s wife, and, probably, his daughter. Two priests 

erforming ceremonies connected with ‘‘ opening the mouth,” and the ‘‘ Reader” 

borat incense and sprinkling water. In the lower register are the instruments 
used in the ceremonies, priests, and animals for sacrifice. 


Chap. i.] IDENTIFICATION WITH THE GODS 41 


Text: (1) Here Becin THE CuarrTers or “CoMING 
FORTH BY DAY,” AND OF THE SONGS OF PRAISE AND 
GLORIFYING, (2) AND OF COMING FORTH FROM, AND 
OF GOING INTO THE GLORIOUS NETER-KHERT! IN THE 
BEAUTIFUL AMENTET, WHICH ARE TO BE RECITED ON 
(3) THE DAY OF THE BURIAL [WHEREBY THE DECEASED | 
SHALL GO IN AFTER COMING FORTH. 


Saith Osiris Ani, (4) Osiris the scribe Ani :— 

“Homage to thee, O Bull of Amentet,? the god 
“Thoth, (5) the king of eternity, is with me. I am 
“the Great God near the divine boat, I have fought 
“(6) for thee. I am one of the gods, those divine 
“chiefs, who make (7) Osiris to be victorious over his 
‘enemies on the day of the weighing of words. (8) I 
‘am thy mediator (?), O Osiris. I am [one] of the 
“gods (9) born of the goddess Nut, who slay the foes 
“of Osiris and who hold in bondage (10) for him the 
“fiend Sebau. Iam thy mediator (?),O Horus. (11) I 
‘have fought for thee, and I have put to flight the 
“enemy for thy name’s sake. Iam Thoth, who made 
“Qsiris to be victorious* (12) over his enemies on the 
“day of the weighing of words * (18) in the great House 
‘of the Aged One (i.e, Ra) who dwelleth in Annu 


1 T.e., the ‘‘ divine lower region,” or the underworld. 

2 T.e., the “hidden” place, or the underworld. The Bullis Osiris. 

3 T.e., Thoth provided him with certain words, and with instruc- 
tions as to their utterance, which enabled Osiris, and therefore every 
just man, to pass the ordeal of judgment, and to gain everlasting 
life, and to make every being to perform what he ordered him to do. 

4 T.e., the dey of judgment. 


42 IDENTIFICATION WITH THE GODS (Chap. 


(Heliopolis). I am Tetteti, the son of Tetteti; (14) I 
“was begotten in Tattu, I was born in (15) Tattu I 
“am with those who weep and with the women who 
“bewail (16) Osiris in the two lands of the Rekht,? and 
“T make Osiris to be victorious over his enemies. 
“(17) Ra commanded Thoth to make Osiris victorious 
“over his enemies; and that which was decreed [for 
“ Osiris] (18) Thoth did for me. I am with Horus on 
“the day of the clothing of (19) Teshtesh* and of the 
‘opening of the wells of water for the purification of 
“the divine being whose heart moveth not,* (20) and 
“of the drawing the bolt of the door of the concealed 
“things in Re-stau.® 1 am with Horus who [acteth] 
(21) as the guardian of the left shoulder of Osiris in 
“Sekhem (Letopolis),® (22) and I go in and I come forth 
“from among the divine flames on the day of the 
“destruction of the (23) Sebau fiends in Sekhem, I 
“am with Horus on the days (24) of the festivals of 
“Osiris, and of the making of offerings on the Sixth 
“day festival,” and on the Tenat festival* [which is 
“ celebrated] in (25) Annu. 


1 T.e., Mendes. 

2 T.e., the goddesses Isis and Nephthys. 

5 I.e., the figure of Osiris upon which the funeral ceremonies were 
performed at Abydos, Mendes, &c. 

4 Urt-db, z.e., ‘‘ Still-Heart,” a name of Osiris. 

5 T.e., the “door of the passages” of the tomb, For the picture 
of Re-stau see p. 96. 

® The shrine at Sekhem boasted the possession of the shoulder of 
Osiris. 

7 T.e., the day of the festival of Osiris. 

8 I.e., the festival which took place on the seyenth day of the 
month, 


Chap.i.] PRAYERS FOR SEPULCHRAL OFFERINGS 43 


“Tam the db! priest who poureth out libations in 
“Tattu [for] Rere (?) the dweller in the Temple of 
“ Osiris,” {on the day of] (26) casting up the earth. I 
“see the things which are concealed in Re-stau, (27) I 
“read from the book of the festival of the divine Ram * 
“[which is] in Jattu. Iam the Sem * priest (28) [and 
“T perform] his course. I [perform the duties of] the 
“Great Chief of the Work® on the day of placing the 
“ Hennw® boat (29) of the god Seker’ upon its sledge. 
“T have grasped the spade (30) on the day of digging 
“the ground in Suten-henen (Heracleopolis Magna).” 

“OQ ye who make perfected souls (31) to enter into 
“the Temple of Osiris, may ye cause the perfected soul 
“of Osiris, the (32) scribe Ani, to be victorious with 
“you in the Temple of Osiris. May he hear as ye 
“hear; may he see (33) as ye see; may he stand as ye 
“stand; may he sit as ye (34) sit [therein].” 

“O ye who give cakes and ale to perfected souls in 
“the Temple (35) of Osiris, give ye cakes and ale at 
“the two seasons (i.e, at morn and at eve, or sunrise 
“and sunset) to the soul of Osiris Ani, who is 


1 T.e., the priest who performs ceremonial purification with water. 

2 Per-Ausar, t.e., ‘‘House of Osiris” = the Greek Busiris, or 
capital of the ninth nome of Lower Egypt. 

3 T.e., Osiris as Ba-neb-Tattu, the ‘‘ Ram, lord of Mendes.” 

4 The functions of this priest in funeral ceremonies were very 
important. 

> The official title of the chief priest of Ptah, the great god of 
Memphis. 

6 The Hennu boat was placed upon its sledge and drawn round 
the sanctuary at dawn, probably in imitation of the sun’s course. 

7 A name given to Osiris, having reference to the god being shut 
up in his coffin. 


44 PRAYERS FOR POWER AND VICTORY  [Chap.i. 


(36) victorious before all the gods of Abtu (Abydos), 
“and who is victorious with you.” 

‘““O ye who open the way (37) and lay open the paths 
“to perfected souls in the Temple (38) of Osiris, open 
“ye the way and lay open the paths (39) to the soul of 
“Osiris, the scribe and steward of all the divine 
“offerings, Ani [who is victorious] (40) with you. 
“May he enter in confidence, and may he come forth in 
“peace from the Temple of Osiris. May he not (41) be 
“rejected, may he not be turned back, may he enter 
“in [as he] pleaseth, may he come forth [as he] 
(42) desireth, and may he be victorious. May the 
“things which he commandeth be performed in the 
“Temple of Osiris; may he walk (43) and may he talk 
“with you, and may he become a glorious being along 
“with you. He hath not been found to rise up 
(44) there,! and the Balance [having weighed him] is 
“now empty.” 

In the Turin papyrus this Chapter ends with the 
following lines, for which no equivalent occurs in the 
earlier texts :—(16) “Let not the decree of judgment 
“passed upon me be placed,” or, according to another 
“yeading, “‘made known in the mouths of the multitude. 
“May my soul lift itself up before (17) [Osiris], having 
“been found to have been pure when on earth. May I 
“come before thee, O lord of the gods; may I arrive at 


1 T.e., in the Balance. The meaning is that the heart, or 
conscience, of the deceased has not been outweighed by the emblem 
of right and truth. 


Chap. i.] PRAYERS FOR DIVINE FOOD, ETC. 45 


“the nome of Double Right and Truth; may I be 
“crowned! like a god endowed with life; may I give 
“forth light like the company of the gods who dwell in 
“neaven; may I become (18) like one of you, lifting 
“up [my] feet in the city of Kher-ahaut;* may I see 
“the Sektet boat of the sacred Sahu®* passing forth 
“over the sky; may I not be driven away from the 
“sight of the lords of the Tuat”* (19) or, according to 
another reading, “the company of the gods; may I 
“smell the sweet savour of the food of the company of 
“the gods, and may I sit down with them. May the 
“Kher-heb (i.e., the Reader) ® make invocation at [my] 
“coffin, and may I hear the prayers which are recited 
“Twhen] the offerings [are made]. May I draw nigh 
“(20) unto the Neshem® boat and may neither my 
“soul nor its lord be turned back.” 

“Homage to thee, O thou who art at the head of 
“Amentet, thou Osiris who dwellest in the city of 
“Nifu-ur.? Grant thou that I may arrive in peace in 
“Amentet and that the lords of Ta-tchesertet § may 
“receive me and may (21) say unto me, ‘Hail! Hail, 


1 Or, ‘may I rise.” 

2 A city near Memphis. 

3 TJ.e., Orion, 

4 The three divisions —= =— @® vet ta tuat into which the 
Egyptians divided the world correspond roughly to the words, 
‘“‘heaven, earth, and hell.” 

5 Literally, ‘‘he that hath the book.” 

6 A name given to the sacred boat of the Sun-God; the word 
neshem means ‘‘light green,” and is commonly applied to green 
felspar. : 

7 The metropolis of the nome of Abtu (Abydos). 

8 Te,, the ‘‘ holy land,” a name of the underworld. 


46 PRAYERS FOR POWER IN HEAVEN (Chap. i. 


“thou that comest] in peace!’ May they prepare for 
‘‘me a place by the side of the Chief in the presence of 
‘divine chiefs; may Isis and Nephthys, the two divine 
“nursing goddesses, receive me at the seasons, and 
“may I come forth (22) into the presence of Un-nefer 
“(i.e Osiris) in triumph. May I follow after, Horus 
“through Re statet, and after Osiris in Tattu; and 
“may I perform all the transformations according to 
“my heart’s desire in every place wheresoever my ka 
“ (double) pleaseth so to do.” 


RUBRIC: If this text be known [by the deceased] upon 
earth, (23) or if he causeth it to be done in writing upon 
[his] coffin, then will he be able to come forth on any day 
that he pleaseth, and to enter into his habitation without 
being driven back. The cakes, and ale, and haunches of 
meat (24) which are upon the altar of Ra shall be given 
unto him, and his homestead shall be among the fields in 
the Sekhet-Aanru, and to him shall be given wheat and 
barley therein, for he shall be vigorous there even as he 
was upon earth. 


47 


CHAPTER Is. 


[From the Papyrus of Nekhtu-eAmen (Naville, Todtenbuch, Bad. T. 
Bl. 5).] 


CA 


eran ae 1 ru 


Vignette: The god Anubis, jackal-headed, standing by the 
side of the bier on which lies the mummy. 


Text: (1) THE CHAPTER OF MAKING THE SAnHU! TO 
ENTER INTO THE TUAT (7.e., UNDERWORLD) ON THE 
DAY OF THE FUNERAL (2) WHEN THESE WORDS ARE TO 
BE SAID :— 


“Homage to thee, O thou that dwellest in Set- 
“Tchesert * of Amentet: (8) Osiris, the royal scribe 


1 = ———— i ; 5 ‘ 
Sahu a means a body which has attained toa 


degree of knowledge and power and glory, whereby it becomes 
henceforth lasting and incorruptible. It could hold converse with 
the soul, and could ascend into heaven and dwell with the beati- 
fied. The Sahu, or spiritual body, sprang from the material body 
through the prayers which were said, and the ceremonies which 
were performed at the tomb, or elsewhere, by duly appointed and 
properly qualified priests. 
2 J.e,, the Holy Mountain, 


48 PRAYERS FOR POWER IN RE-STAU (Chap. is. 


“Nekhtu-Amen, victorious, knoweth thee, (4) and he 
“]noweth thy name. Deliver thou him from the 
“worms (5) which are in Re-stau, which live upon the 
“bodies of men and women and (6) which reed upon 
“their blood, for Osiris, the favoured one of the god of 
“his city, (7) the royal scribe, Nekhtu-Amen, victori- 
“ous, knoweth you, and he knoweth your names. 
“(Let this be] the first bidding of Osiris Neb-er-tcher 1 
“(8) who keepeth hidden his body. May he give air 
“fand escape] from the Terrible One who dwelleth in 
“the Bight * of the Stream of Amentet, and may he 
“decree (9) the actions of him that is rismg up. Let 
“him pass on unto him whose throne is within the 
“darkness, who giveth glory in Re-stau. (10) O lord 
“of light, come tlou and swallow up the worms 
“which are in Amentet. The great god who dwelleth 
“in Tattu, (11) and who is unseen, heareth his prayers, 
“but those who are in affliction fear him as he cometh 
“forth (12) with the sentence to the divine block. I 
“Osiris, the royal scribe, Nekhtu-Amen, have come 
“bearing the decree of (13) Neb-er-tcher, and Horus 
“hath taken possession of his throne for him, His 
“father, the lord of those who are (14) in the boat of 
“father Horus, hath ascribed praise unto him. He 
“cometh with tidings . . . and may he see (15) Annu 
“ (Heliopolis), Their chief standeth upon the earth 


! T.e., Osiris, reconstructed and complete, the ‘‘lord of whole- 
ness.” 

* According to Chapter XVII., line 46, the Terrible One is the 
‘heart of Osiris, which is the devourer of all slaughtered things.” 


Chap. ii. 2] THE LIFE AFTER DEATH 49 


“before him, and the scribes magnify him at the door 
“of their assemblies, (16) and they bind his swathings 
“in Annu. He hath led captive heaven, and he hath 
“seized the earth in [his] grasp. Neither the heavens 
“nor the earth (17) can be taken away from him, for 
“behold, he is Ra, the first-born of the gods. His 
“mother suckleth him and she giveth [to him] her 
“breast (18) in the horizon.” 


RUBRIC: The words of this chapter are to be recited after 
[the deceased] is laid to rest in Amentet, whereby the region 
Tanenet is made to be content with her lord. Then shall 
Osiris, the royal scribe, Nekhtu-Amen, triumphant, come 
forth, (19) and he shall embark in the boat of Ra, and [his] 
body upon its bier shall be counted [with those therein], and 
he shall be stablished in the Tuat (underworld). 


CHAPTER II. 
[From the Papyrus of Ani (Brit. Mus. No. 10,470, sheet 18).] 
Vignette: A man, standing upright, holding a staff. 


Text: (1) THE CHAPTER OF COMING FORTH BY DAY 
AND OF LIVING AFTER DEATH. Saith Osiris Ani, 
victorious :— 

“Hail, One, shining from the Moon! (2) Hail, One, 
“shining from the Moon! Grant that this Osiris Ani 
“may come forth among those multitudes which are 

VoL, 1. E 


50 THE LIFE AFTER DEATH (Chap. ii. 3 


“ (3) outside; and let him be established as a dweller 
“(or let him go about) among the denizens of heaven ; 
‘and let the underworld be opened unto him. And 
“behold, Osiris, (4) Osiris Ani, shall come forth by day 
“to do whatsoever he pleaseth upon the earth among 
the living ones.” 


CHAPTER IIL. 
{From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 18).] 


Vignette: This Chapter has no vignette. 


Text: (1) ANOTHER CHAPTER LIKE UNTO THE 
PRECEDING. The overseer of the house of the over- 
seer of the seal, Nu, triumphant, saith :— (2) 


“Hail, thou god Tem, who comest forth from the 
“Great Deep,! and who shinest with glory under the 
“form of the double Lion-god,? send out with might 
“thy words unto those who are in thy presence, (3) and 
“Jet the overseer of the house of the overseer of the 
“seal, Nu, triumphant, enter into their assembly. He 
‘hath performed the decree which hath been spoken to 
. “the mariners of Ra at eventide, (4) and the Osiris 
‘Nu, triumphant, liveth after he hath died, even as 


! T.e., the celestial Nile. 
* T.e., the god Shu and the goddess Tefnut, 


Chap. iv. 2] FREEDOM OF WAY IN RE-STAU 51 


“doth Ra day by day...... As Ra is born from 
“(5) yesterday even so shall the Osiris Nu be born 
“[from yesterday], and every god shall rejoice at the 
“life of the Osiris Nu, even as they rejoice at (6) the 
“life of Ptah when he maketh his appearance from the 
“oreat Temple! of the Aged One which is in Annu.” 


CHAPTER IV. 
[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 19).] 


Vignette : This Chapter has no vignette. 


Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF PASSING OVER THE 
CELESTIAL ROAD (2) OF Re-stau. The overseer of the 
house of the overseer of the seal, the Osiris Nu, 


triumphant, saith :— 

“T open out a way over the watery abyss which 
“formeth a path between the two Combatants® and I 
“have come; may the fields of Osiris be given over 


“into my power.” 


1 T.e., the temple of Ra at Heliopolis. ; : : 
2 T.e., Horus- and Set. Horus engaged in battle with Set, his 
father’s murderer, and after a prolonged fight which lasted three 
days, vanquished his opponent. Set threw filth at Horus, but 
Horus destroyed the members of Set ; see Chapter XVII., ll. 67-69. 
As nature powers Horus and Set typified Light and Darkness 


respectively. 


52 THE DECEASED TO DO NO WORK [Chap. v. 


CHAPTER V. 


[From the Papyrus of Nobseni (Brit. Mus. No. 9900, sheet 11). ] 


Vignette: A seated man (see Papyrus of Sutimes, plate 1.) 


Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF NOT LETTING WORK BE 
DONE IN THE UNDERWORLD by Nebseni, the scribe and 
draughtsman in the Temple of Ptah, who saith :— 

“T lift up the hand of the man who is inactive, I 
“have come from the city of Unnu (Hermopolis), I 
“am the divine Soul which liveth, and I lead with me 
“the hearts of the apes.” ? : , 


1 T.e., the six apes which are seén adoring the Sun-god Ra when 
he rises; in the Papyrus of Nu-nefer (see the vignette on p. 77) 
the apes (amhetet) are seven in number. 


Ch, vi. 1-3] ALL WORK IS TO BE DONE FOR HIM 5yS" 


CHAPTER VI. 


[From the Papyrus of Nebseni (Brit. Mus. No. 9900, sheet 10). ] 


Vignette: A standing, bearded male figure, or a man 
stretching out his hands to a god. 


Text: (1) Tue CHAPTER OF MAKING THE sHABTI?! 
FIGURE TO DO WORK FOR A MAN IN THE UNDERWORLD, 
The scribe Nebseni, the draughtsman in the Temples 
(2) of the North and South, the man highly venerated 
in the Temple of Ptah, saith :— 

“Q thou shabti figure (3) of the scribe Nebseni, the 
“son of the scribe Thena, victorious, and of the lady of 


1 The original meaning of thesvord shabti is unknown, but at a 
comparatively late period the word was connected with the word 


usheb » os , ‘*to answer,” probably because the figure is 


supposed to answer the address of the deceased. Several forms of 
the Chapter are known, and the oldest seems to date from the 
Vith Dynasty; they are found on figures made of stone, wood, 
porcelain, &c., and all great collections of Egyptian antiquities 
contain hundreds of examples of them. 


54 AGRICULTURAL LABOURS [{Chap. vi. 4 


“the house Mutrestha, victorious, (4) if I be called, o1 
“Gf I be adjudged to do any work whatsoever of the 
“Jabours which are to be done in the underworld— 
“behold, [for thee] opposition will there be (5) set 
‘‘aside—by a man in his turn, let the judgment fall 
“upon thee instead of upon me always, in the matter 
“of sowing the fields, of filling (6) the water-courses 
“with water, and of bringing the sands of this east [to] 
“the west.” 

[The shabti figure answereth], “Verily I am here 
“land will come] whithersoever thou biddest me.” 


CHAPTER VII. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 22).] 


Vignette: The deceased spearing a serpent (see Pap, Funératre 
de Nebset, ed. Pierret and Devéria, pl. 5). 


Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF PASSING OVER THE 
ABOMINABLE BACK OF (2) ArEpP, The overseer of the 


Chap. vii. 4] ADJURATION OF APEP 55 


house of the overseer of the seal, Nu, triumphant, 
saith :-— 


. “Hail, thou creature of wax,! who leadest away 
“[victims] and destroyest them, and who livest upon 
“the weak and helpless, may I never become weak and 
“helpless (3) [before] thee, may I never suffer collapse 
“{before| thee. And thy poison shall never enter into 
‘“‘my members, for my members are [as] the members of 
“the god Tem; and since thou thyself dost not suffer 
“collapse [I shall not suffer collapse]. O let not the 
“pains of death (4) which come upon thee enter into 
“my members. Iam the god Tem, and I am in the 
‘foremost part of Nu (i.e. the sky), and the power 
“which protecteth me is that which is with-all the 
“goods for ever. Iam he whose name is hidden, and 
“whose habitation is holy for millions of years. I am 
“he who dwelleth therein (?) and I come forth along 
“with the god Tem. I am he who shall not be 
“condemned (?); [ am strong, I am strong.” 


1 This address shows that the Chapter was said over a wax figure 
of a fiend, which was burnt in a fire during its recital; the fiend 
addressed is Apep, and a figure of him was burnt to ‘‘ prevent the 
coming on of storms.” See my Egyptian Magic, p. 81 ff. 


56 PASSAGE THROUGH THE UNDERWORLD (Ch. viii. 


CHAPTER VIII. 


[From the Papyrus of Ani (Brit. Mus. No. 10,470, sheet 18).] 


Vignette : The emblem of Amenta, towards which Ani, clad 
in white and holding a staff in his left hand and a bandlet in 
the right, is walking. 

Text; (1) THE CHAPTER OF PASSING THROUGH 
Awenter [AND COMING FoRTH] BY DAY. Saith Osiris 
Ani :— 

“The city of Unnu (Hermopolis) is opened. My 
“head (2) is sealed up, O Thoth, and strong is the Eye 
“of Horus. Ihave delivered the Eye of Horus which 
“shineth with splendours on the forehead of Ra, 
“(3) the father of the gods. I am the same Osiris, 
“the dweller in Amentet. Osiris knoweth his day, and 
“that he shall live through his period of life; and 
“shall not I do likewise? (4) I am the Moon-god, 
“who dwelleth among the gods, I shall not perish. 
“Stand up, therefore, O Horus, for [Osiris] hath 
“reckoned thee among the gods,” 


Chap, 1x.] PASSAGE THROUGH THE TOMB 57 


CHAPTER IX. 


[From the Papyrus of Ani (Brit. Mus. No. 10,470, sheet 18). ] 


Vignette: A ram having upon his head the Atef crown 

standing upon a pylon-shaped pedestal, which rests on a green 

reed-mat; before him is an altar upon which stand a libation 

vase and a lotus flower. The scribe Ani, clothed in white, 
stands with both hands raised in adoration. 

Text: (1) Tue Carrer OF COMING FORTH BY DAY 
AFTER HAVING MADE THE PASSAGE THROUGH THE 
Toms. Saith Osiris Ani :— 

“ Hail Soul, thou mighty one of strength! (2) Verily 
“T am here, I have come, I behold thee. I have 
“assed through the Tuat (underworld), I have seen 
“(3) [my] divine father Osiris, I have scattered the 
“oloom of night. I am his beloved one. I have 
“come; I have seen my divine father Osiris. I have 
“stabbed the heart of Suti.' [I] have performed [all] 


1 Suti or Set, the personification of darkness, and the mighty 
antagonist of Horus, by whom he was slain. 


58 SPEARING THE SERPENT ({Chap. ix. 5 


“the ceremonies for my divine father Osiris, (5) I have 
“opened every way in heaven and in earth. Iam the 
“son who loveth his father Osiris. (6) I have become 
“a sahu,! I have become a khu,? I am furnished [with 
“what I need]. Hail, every god, hail every khu! I 
“have made a path [for myself, ft! Osiris, the scribe 
“ Ani, victorious.” 


CHAPTER X3 


[From the Papyrus of Ani (Brit. Mus. No. 10,470, sheet 18). ] 


Vignette : Ani, clad in white, spearing a serpent. 


1 T.e,, the spiritual form of a man which has come into being 
through the prayers which have been said and the ceremonies 
which have been performed over his dead body. 

2 A shining or translucent, intangible casing or covering which 
the deceased possesses in the underworld; it is frequently depicted 
in the form of a mummy. 

3 In the Saite Recension this Chapter is found twice, viz., as 
Chapters X. and XLVIII.; as there is no good reason why it should 
be Chapter XLYIII., it has been placed here. 


Chap, x. 1-xi. 2] THE POWER TO EAT 59 


Text: (1) ANnoTHER CHAPTER [TO BE SAID] BY A 
MAN WHO COMETH FORTH BY DAY AGAINST HIS ENEMIES 
IN THE UNDERWORLD. [Saith Osiris Ani :—] 

“T have divided the heavens, (2) I have cleft the 
“horizon, I have traversed the earth, [following] upon 
“his footsteps. The Mighty Kuu taketh possession of 
“me and carrieth me away, because, behold, (3) Iam . 
“provided with his magical words for millions of years, 
“T eat with my mouth, I crush my food with my 
“jawbones. (4) Behold, I am the god who is the lord 
“of the Tuat (underworld); may there be given unto 
“me, Osiris Ani, these things in perpetuity without fail 
“or lessening.” 


CHAPTER XI! 
[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 21).] 


Vignette : This Chapter is without a vignette in both the 
Theban and Saite Recensions, 

Text: (1) Tue Cuaprer or [A MAN] COMING FORTH 
AGAINST HIS ENEMIES IN THE UNDERWORLD. The 
overseer of the house of the overseer of the seal, Nu, 
triumphant, saith :— (2) 

“O thou god who eatest thine arm,’ I have departed 
“from thy road. I am Ra, and I have come forth 


1 In the Saite Recension this Chapter is found twice, viz., as 
Chapters XI. and XLIX.; as there is no good reason why it should 
be Chapter XLIX., it has been placed here. 

2 This Chapter is addressed either to Apep, or to one of his fiends, 


60 POWER TO WALK AND SPEAK (Chap. xi. 3 


“from the horizon against my enemies, and he hath 
“oranted to me that they shall not escape (3) from me. 
‘T have made an offering, and my hand is like that of 
“the lord of the Urereé crown. I have lifted up my 
“feet even as the uraei goddesses rise up.* My over- 
‘throw shall not be accomplished, (4) and as for mine 
“enemy he hath been given over into my power and he 
“shall not be delivered from me. I shall stand up like 
“ Horus, and [ shall sit down like Ptah, and I shall be 
“mighty like Thoth, (5) and I shall be strong like 
“Tem. I shall, therefore, walk with my legs, I shall 
“speak with my mouth, I shall go round about in 
“quest of mine enemy, and [as] he hath been delivered 
“over to me he shall not escape from me.” 


CHAPTER XII 
[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 9).] 


Vignette: This Chapter is without a vignette in both the 
Theban and Saite Recensions, 

Text: (1) Tue CHAPTER OF GOING INTO AND OF 
COMING FORTH FROM [THE UNDERWORLD]. The Osiris 
Nu, triumphant, saith :— 

“Hymns of praise to thee, O Ra! thou keeper (?) of 
“seeret (2) gates which are on the brow of the god 

1 In the Saite Recension this Chapter is found twice, viz., as 


Chapters XII. and CXX.; as there is no good reason why it should 
be Chapter CXX., it has been placed here. 


Chap. xiii.] PETITION FOR A ROAD 61 


“Seb, by the side of the Balance of Ra, wherein he lifteth 
“up Right and Truth (Maat) (8) day by day. In very 
“truth I have burst through the earth,’ grant [thou] 
“unto me that I may go forward and arrive at the 
“state of old age.” 


CHAPTER XIIL’ 
[From the Papyrus of Nebseni (Brit. Mus. No. 9900, sheet 12). ] 


Vignette : This Chapter is without a vignette in both the 
Theban and Saite Recensions. 


Text: [Tux CHAPTER OF ENTERING INTO AND OF 
coMING ForTH FROM AMENTET]. 

[Osiris, the scribe Nebseni, victorious, saith ;:—] 

eae MOrisiggic yet esr. ae ee porn, like, the 
“Hawk and I come forth like the Bennw bird, the 
“morning star (?) of Ra. May a path be made for me 
“whereby I may enter in peace into the beautiful 
« Amentet; and may I be by the Lake of Horus; {and 
“may I lead the greyhounds of Horus]; and maya path 


1 T.e., the Earth-god, in whose domain the body of the deceased 
was laid after death. 

2 The allusion is to the freedom to come and to go in the under- 
world which the deceased enjoys through the religious texts which 
he knows. 

3 In the Saite Recension this Chapter is found twice, viz., as 

Shapters XIII. and CXXI.; as there is no good reason why it 
should be Chapter CXXI., it has been placed here. 


62 PRAYER FOR CLEANSING FROM SIN [Chap. xiii. 


“be made for me whereby I may enter in and adore 
“Osiris, the lord of Life].” 

In the Theban Recension this Chapter appears with- 
out a rubric, but in the Saite Recension as given in the 
Turin Papyrus (Lepsius, Todtenbuch, Bll. 4 and 45) 
we have the following :— 

RUBRIC: [This Chapter] is to be recited over a ring [made] 
of ankham flowers, which shall be laid on the right ear of the 
khu, together with another ring wrapped up in a strip of byssus 
cloth, whereon the name of Osiris, Auf-ankh, victorious, born 


of the Lady Shert-amsu, victorious, shall be done [in writing] 
on the day of sepulture. 


CHAPTER XIV. 


[From the Papyrus of Mes-em-neter (Naville, Todtenbuch, Bd. I. 
Bl. 18).] 


Vignette: This Chapter has no vignette either in the Theban 
or in the Saite Recension. 


Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF PUTTING AN END TO ANY 
SHAME THAT MAY BE IN THE HEART OF THE GOD for 
the chief deputy of Amen, [the scribe] Mes-em-neter, 
victorious, [who saith :—] 

“Hymns of praise to thee, O thou god who makest 
“the moment to advance, (2) thou dweller among 
“mysteries of every kind, thou guardian of the word 
“which I speak. Behold, the god hath shame of me, 
“but let my faults be washed away and let them fall 
“(3) upon both hands of the god of Right and Truth, 


Ch xiv.5] PRAYER FOR PEACE WITH THE GOD 63 


“Do away utterly with the transgression which is in 
“me, together with [my] wickedness and sinfulness, O 
“god of Right and Truth. May this god be at peace 
“with me! Do away utterly with the (4) obstacles 
“which are between thee and me. O thou to whom 
“offerings are made in the divine [city] of Kenur,! grant 
“thou that I may bring to thee the offerings which will 
“make peace [between thee and men] whereon thou 
“livest, and that I also may live thereon. Be thou at 
“peace (5) with me and do away utterly with all the 
“shame of me which thou hast in thy heart because 
“of me.” 


CHAPTER XV. 


[From the Papyrus of Ani (Brit. Mus. No. 10,470, sheets 18 and 19).] 


Vignette: Ani standing, with both hands raised in adoration, 
before Ra, hawk-headed, and seated in a boat floating upon 


1 The variants of this name are ‘‘Kemur” and “ Ker-ur” (seo 
Nayille, op. cit., Bd. II. p. 21). 


64 HYMN TO RA (Chap. xv. x 


the sky. On a platform in the bows sits the god Heru-pa-khrat! 

with his right hand raised to his mouth, which he touches with 

one finger; the side of the boat is ornamented with feathers of 

Maat and with an Utchat.2 The handles of the oars and the 

tops of the rowlocks are in the form of hawks’ heads, and on 
the blades of the oars are Utchats. 


Text: (1) A Hymn or Praise to RA WHEN HE 
RISETH UPON THE HORIZON, AND WHEN HE SETTETH 
IN THE LAND OF LIFE. Osiris, the scribe Ani, saith :— 


“Homage to thee, (2) O Ra, when thou risest [as] 
“Vem-Heru-khuti.® Thou art adored [by me when] 
“thy beauties are before mine eyes, and [when thy] 
(3) radiance [falleth] upon [my] body. Thou goest 
“forth to thy setting in the Sektet boat with [fair] 
‘winds, and thy heart is glad; the (4) heart of the 
“ Matet* boat rejoiceth. Thou stridest over the heavens 
“in peace, and all thy foes are cast down; the never 
“resting stars (5) sing hymns of praise unto thee, and 
“the stars which rest, and the stars which never fail 
“ olorify thee as thou (6) sinkest to rest in the horizon 
“of Manu,® O thou who art beautiful at morn and at 
“eve, O thou lord who livest and art established, O 
“my lord! 

“Homage to thee, O thou who art Ra when thou 


1 T.e., ‘‘ Horus the Child,” the Harpocrates of the Greeks. 


2 The two Utchats, Se represent the Sun and the Moon, ana 
also the two halves of the Sun’s orbit. 

3 T.e., Tem-Harmachis, a double god who united within himself 
the attributes of the night and the early morning suns, 

4 The name of the morning boat of the sun. 

5 J.e., the mountain of sunset. 


Chap. xv. 14] HYMN TO RA 65 


“risest, and (7) Tem when thou settest [in] beauty. 
“Thou risest and shinest on the back of thy mother 
“{Nut], O thou who art crowned king (8) of the gods ! 
“Nut doeth homage unto thee, and everlasting and 
“never-changing order! embraceth thee at morn and at 
“eve. Thou stridest over the heaven, being glad of 
“heart, and the Lake of Testes * (9) is content [thereat]. 
“The Sebau Fiend hath fallen to the ground; his arms 
‘“‘and his hands have been hacked off, andthe knife hath 
“severed the joints of his body. Ra hath a fair wind 
(10); the Se#tet boat goeth forth and sailing along it 
“cometh into port. The gods of the south and of the 
“north, of the west and of the east, praise (11) thee, O 
“thou divine substance, from whom all forms of life 
“come into being. Thou sendest forth the word, and 
“the earth is flooded with silence, O thou only One, 
“who didst dwell in heaven before ever the earth and 
“the mountains came into existence. (12) O Runner, 
“O Lord, O only One, thou maker of things which are, 
“thou hast fashioned the tongue of the company of the 
“goods, thou hast produced whatsoever cometh forth 
“from the waters, and thou springest up from them 
“over the flooded land of the Lake of Horus. (13) Let 
“me snuff the air which cometh forth from thy nostrils, 
“and the north wind which cometh forth from thy 
“mother [Nut]. O make thou to be glorious my 
“shining form (kh), O Osiris, (14) make thou to be 


1 T.e., Maat. 2 A name of heaven, or of a part of it, 


VOL. I. F 


66 HYMN TO RA [Chap. xv, 14 


“divine my soul (ba)! ‘Thou art worshipped [in] peace 
‘(or [in] setting), O lord of the gods, thou art exalted 
“by reason of thy wondrous works. Shine thou with 
“thy rays of light upon my body day by day (15) [upon 
me], Osiris the scribe, the teller of the divine offerings 
“of all the gods, the overseer of the granary of the 
“lords of Abtu (Abydos), the royal scribe in truth who 
“Joveth thee ; Ani, victorious in peace.” 


CHAPTER XV. 
Hymn and Litany to Osiris, 


[From the Papyrus of Ani (Brit. Mus. No. 10,470, sheet 19). ] 


Vignette : “Osiris Ani, the royal scribe in truth, who loveth 
“him, the seribe and teller of the divine offerings of all the 
“ gods,” and “ Osiris Thuthu, the lady of the house, the singing 


HYMN AND LITANY TO OSIRIS 67 


“woman of Amen,” with hands raised in adoration presumably 
before the god Osiris who, accompanied by the goddess Isis, 
stands in a shrine made in the form of a funeral chest.! 


Text: “Praise be unto thee, O Osiris, lord of 
“eternity, Un-nefer, Heru-Khuti (Harmachis), whose 
“forms are manifold, and whose attributes are majestic, 
“ (2) Ptah-Seker-Tem? in Annu (Heliopolis), the lord 
“of the hidden place, and the creator of Het-ka-Ptah * 
“and of the gods [therein], the guide of the underworld, 
“(3) whom [the gods] glorify when thou settest in Nut. 
“Tsis embraceth thee in peace, and she driveth away 
“the fiends from the (4) mouth of thy paths. Thou 
“turnest thy face upon Amentet, and thou makest the 
“earth to shine as with refined copper. Those who 
“have lain down (i.e., the dead) rise up to see thee, 
“they (5) breathe the air and they look upon thy face 
“when the disk riseth on its horizon; their hearts are 
“at peace inasmuch as they behold thee, O thou who 
“art Kternity and Everlastingness ! ” 


LITANY. 


(1) Petition—‘ Homage to thee, [O lord of] starry 
“deities in Annu, and of heavenly beings in Kher-aha ; 


1 The shrine of Osiris is separated from the figures of Ani and 
his wife by the Litany and several lines of a hymn to Ra; this 
portion of the vignette is given on p. 71. 

2 A triad composed of forms of the morning, evening, and night 
suns. 

8 J.e., the House of the ka of Ptah, a name of Memphis. 


68 LITANY TO OSIRIS 


“thou god Unti,! who art more glorious than the gods 
“who are hidden in Annu.” 

Response.—(10) “O grant? thou unto me a path 
‘“‘whereon I may pass in peace, for I am just and true ; 
“T have not spoken lies wittingly, nor have I done 
“aught with deceit.” 

(2) Petition.—“ Homage to thee, O An in Antes (?), 
‘“Heru-khuti (Harmachis), with long strides thou 
‘stridest over heaven, O Heru-khuti.” 

Response.—(10) “O grant thou unto me a path 
‘“‘whereon I may pass in peace, for I am just and true; 
“T have not spoken lies wittingly, nor have I done 
“aught with deceit.” 

(83) Petition‘ Homage to thee, O Soul of everlast- 
“inoness, thou Soul that dwellest in Tattu, Un-nefer, 
“son of Nut; thou art lord of Akert.” 

Response —(10) “O grant thou unto me a path 
‘““whereon I may pass in peace, for I am just and true; 
“T have not spoken lies wittingly, nor have I done 
“aught with deceit.” 

(4) Petition.—“ Homage to thee in thy dominion 
“over Tattu; the Ureret crown is established upon thy 
“head; thou art the One who maketh the strength 

1 A god who is represented holding a star in each hand, and 
walking before a solar bark. 

2 The following petition, ‘‘O grant thou unto mea path,” &c., 
is written once only, and at the end of the Litany, but it was 
clearly intended to be repeated after each of the nine addresses. 
This is proved by the Saite Recension (see Lepsius, op. cit., Bl. 5), 
where the words, ‘‘ Grant thou the sweet breath of the north wind 


to the Osiris Auf-ankh” are written in two places, and are intended 
to be said after each of the ten addresses above them, 


LITANY TO OSIRIS 69 


“which protecteth himself, and thou dwellest in peace 
pony lattu. 

Response.—(10) “O grant thou unto me a path 
‘“whereon I may pass in peace, for I am just and true ; 
“T have not spoken lies wittingly, nor have I done 
“aught with deceit.” 

(5) Petition.—“ Homage to thee, O lord of the Acacia 
“Tree, the Seker boat is set upon its sledge; thou 
“turnest back the Fiend, the worker of evil, and thou 
‘“causest the Utchat to rest upon its seat.” 

Response.—(10) “O grant thou unto me a path 
““whereon I may pass in peace, for I am just and true ; 
“T have not spoken lies wittingly, nor have I done 
“aught with deceit.” 

(6) Petition —‘ Homage to thee, O thou who art 
“mighty in thine hour, thou great and mighty Prince, 
“ dweller in An-rut-f; lord of eternity and creator of ever- 
“Jastingness, thou art the lord of Suten-henen.” ” 

Response.—(10) “O grant thou unto me a_ path 
‘“‘whereon I may pass in peace, for I am just and true ; 
“JT have not spoken lies wittingly, nor have I done 
“aught with deceit.” 

(7) Petition.— Homage to thee, O thou who restest 

! T.e., “‘the place where nothing groweth,” the name of a district 
in the underworld. 

? T.e., Heracleopolis Magna, the capital of the Heracleopolites 
nome. Egyptian mythology declares that here Osiris was first 
crowned, that here Horus succeeded to the rank and dignity of his 
father, that here the sky was first separated from the earth, and 
that from this place Sekhet set out on her mission to destroy man- 


kind because they had rebelled against Ra, who, they declared, 
had become old and incapable of ruling them rightly. 


7O LITANY TO OSIRIS 


“upon Right and Truth, thou art the lord of Abtu 
(Abydos), and thy limbs are joined unto Ta-tchesertet ; 
“thou art he to whom fraud and guile are hateful.” 

Response—(10) “O grant thou unto me a path 
‘““whereon I may pass in peace, for I am just and true ; 
“T have not spoken lies wittingly, nor have I done 
“aught with deceit.” 

(8) Petition.—‘* Homage to thee, O thou who art 
“within thy boat, thou bringest Hapi (7.e., ther Nile) 
‘forth from his source ; the light shineth upon thy body 
“and thou art the dweller in Nekhen.” ! 

Response.—(10) “O grant thou unto me a path 
‘“whereon I may pass in peace, for I am just and true ; 
“T have not spoken les wittingly, nor have I done 
“aught with deceit.” 

(9) Petition.—“ Homage to thee, O creator of the 
“gods, thou King of the North and of the South, O 
“Osiris, victorious one, ruler of the world in thy 
‘“oracious seasons; thou art the lord of the celestial 
“world.” ? ; 

Response.-—(10) “O grant thou unto me a path 
‘““whereon I may pass in peace, for I am just and true; 
“Thave not spoken lies wittingly, nor have I done 
“aught with deceit.” 


1 The name of the sanctuary of the goddess Nekhebet in Upper 
Egypt, the Hileithyiapolis of the Greeks. 

2 L.e., the two lands Afebui which were situated one on each side 
of the celestial Nile. 


HYMN TO RA 71 


Hymn to Ra. 
[From the Papyrus of Ani (Brit. Mus. No. 10,470, sheet 20). ] 


Vignette : Osiris, wearing the white crown and holding the 
crook, whip, and sceptre, standing in a shrine; behind him is 
the goddess Isis in the character of the Divine Mother. 

Text: (1) A Hymn or Praise To RA WHEN HE 
RISETH IN THE EASTERN PART OF HEAVEN. Those who 
are in his train (2) rejoice, and lo! Osiris Ani victori- 
ous, saith :— Meee 

“Hail, thou Disk, }4| 
“thou lord of rays, 
“(3) who risest on 
“the horizon day by 


‘ ve 2 yp &) C 3 
(i Ox tomy Bye 
sa | 


“day! Shine thou 
“with thy beams 
“of light upon the 
“face of Osiris Ani, 
‘who is victorious ; 
“for he singeth 
“hymns of praise 
“unto thee at (4) 
“dawn, and _ he 
“maketh thee to set 
“at eventide with 


“words of adora- 
“tion. May the inn 
“soul of Osiris Ani, the triumphant one, come forth 


72 HYMN TO RA 


(5) with thee into heaven, may he go forth inthe Mdtet 
“boat. May he come into port in the Sektet boat, and 
‘may he cleave his path among the never (6) resting 
“stars in the heavens.” 

Osiris Ani, being in peace and in triumph, adoreth his 
lord, (7) the lord of eternity, saying: ‘‘ Homage to thee, 
“O Heru-khuti (Harmachis), who art the god Khepera, 
“the self-created ; when thou risest on the (8) horizon 
“and sheddest thy beams of light upon the lands of 
“the North and of the South, thou art beautiful, yea 
“beautiful, and all the gods rejoice when they behold 
“thee, (9) the King of heaven. The goddess Nebt- 
“Unnut! is stablished upon thy head; and her uraei 
“of the South and of the North are upon thy brow; 
(10) she taketh up her place before thee. The god 
“Thoth is stablished in the bows of thy boat to destroy 
“utterly all thy foes. (11) Those who are in the Tuat 
“ (underworld) come forth to meet thee, and they bow 
“in homage as they come towards thee, to behold [thy] 
(12) beautiful Image. And I have come before thee 
“that I may be with thee to behold thy Disk every 
“day. May I not be shut up in [the tomb], may I not 
“be (13) turned back, may the limbs of my body be 
“made new again when I view thy beauties, even as 
“fare those of| all thy favoured ones, (14) because I 
‘am one of those who worshipped thee [whilst I lived] 
“upon earth. May I come in unto the land of eternity, 


1 A name meaning something like the ‘‘ lady of the hour.” 


HYMN TO RA 73 


“may I come even (15) unto the everlasting land, for 
“behold, O my lord, this hast thou ordained for me.” 
And lo, Osiris Ani triumphant in peace, the trium- 
phant one, saith: (16) “Homage to thee, O thou who 
“visest in thy horizon as Ra, thou reposest upon law 


i —$=(s 
/ JOH0OSS J If: 
TE = SST 


J 


THe Sunrisz. The Tet, ie or tree-trunk which held the body of Osiris, 


standing hetween Isis and Nephthys, who kneel in adoration, one on each side 
of it. From the Tet proceeds the emblem of life, which has arms that support 
the Disk of the Sun. The six apes represent the spirits of the dawn, 
(This scene is from the Papyrus of Ani, plate 2.) 


“{which changeth not nor can it be altered]. Thou 
“passest over the sky, and every face watcheth thee 
“(17) and thy course, for thou hast been hidden from 
“their gaze. Thou dost shew thyself at dawn and at 


74 HYMN TO RA 


“eventide day by day. (18) The Selteé boat, wherein 
“is thy Majesty, goeth forth with might; thy beams 
[shine] upon [all] faces ; [the number] of thy red and 
“yellow rays cannot be known, nor can thy bright (19) 
“beams be depicted. The lands of the gods, and the 
“eastern lands of Punt! must be seen before they can 
“be described and before that which is hidden (20) 
“lin thee] may be measured. Alone and by thy- 
“self thou dost manifest thyself [when] thou comest 
“into being above Nu (i.c., the sky). May Ani (21) 
“advance, even as thou dost advance; may he never 
“cease [to go forward], even as thy Majesty ceaseth not 
“‘[to go forward], even though it be for a moment; for 
‘with strides dost thou (22) in one little moment pass 
“over the spaces which would need hundreds of thou- 
“sands and millions of years [for man to pass over ; 
this] thou doest, and then dost thou sink to rest. 
“Thou (23) puttest an end to the hours of the night, 
“and thou dost count them, even thou; thou endest 
“them in thine own appointed season, and the earth 
“becometh light. (24) Thou settest thyself before thy 
“handiwork in the likeness of Ra; thou risest in the 
“horizon.” 

Osiris, the scribe Ani, victorious, declareth (25) his 
praise of thee when thou shinest, and when thou risest 
at dawn he crieth in his joy at thy birth: (26) “Thou 
“art crowned with the majesty of thy beauties; thou 


' T.e,, the spice-producing land near the most easterly part of 
Somali land, 


HYMN TO RA 75 


“mouldest thy limbs as thou dost advance, and thou 
“bringest them forth without birth-pangs in the form 
“of (27) Ra, as thou dost rise up into the upper air. 
“Grant thou that I may come unto the heaven which 
“is everlasting, and unto the mountain where dwell 
“thy favoured ones. May I be joined (28) unto those 
“shining beings, holy and perfect, who are in the 
“underworld; and may I come forth with them to 


THE Sunxise. (From the Papyrus of Qenna, plate 1.) 


“behold thy beauties when thou shinest (29) at even- 
“tide and goest to thy mother Nut.’ Thou dost place 
“thyself in the west, and my two hands are [raised] in 
‘adoration [of thee] (30) when thou settest as a living 
“being. Behold, thou art the maker of eternity, and 
Ba 


—— 


Ba 
1 Te., Nut, | , the night sky, as opposed to 


a , the day sky. 


76 HYMN TO RA 


“thou art adored [when] thou settest in the heavens. 
“T have given my heart unto thee (81) without waver- 
‘ing, O thou who art mightier than the gods.” 

Osiris Ani, triumphant, saith: “ A hymn of praise to 
‘thee, O thou who risest (32) like unto gold, and who 
“dost flood the world with light on the day of thy birth. 
“Thy mother giveth thee birth upon [her] hand, and 
“thou dost give light unto the course of the Disk (38). 
“O thou great Light who shinest in the heavens, thou 
“dost strengthen the generations of men with the Nile- 
“flood, and thou dost cause gladness in all lands, and 
“in all cities (34), and in all the temples. Thou art 
‘olorious by reason of thy splendours, and thou makest 
“strong thy KA (i.e., Double), with hu and tchefau 
“foods. O thou who art the mighty one of victories, 
(35) thou who art the power of [all] Powers, who 
‘dost make strong thy throne against evil fiends ; who 
‘art glorious in majesty in the Sektet boat, and who 
“art exceeding mighty (36) in the Afet boat, make 
“thou glorious Osiris Ani with victory in the under- 
‘world ; grant thou that in the netherworld he may be 
(87) without evil. I pray thee to put away [his] 
‘faults behind thee: grant thou that he may be one of 
‘thy venerable servants (38) who are with the shining 
‘ones; may he be joined unto the souls which are in Ta- 
“tchesertet; and may he journey into the Sekhet-Aaru? 

' Hw and tchefau are the celestial foods upon which the gods and 
the beatified live. 


° The Field of lilies, reeds, and water plants, which formed one 
of the sections of the Sekhet-Hetepet, or ‘‘ Elysian Fields.” 


HYMN TO RA a. 


(39) by a prosperous and happy decree, he the Osiris, 
“the scribe, Ani, triumphant.” 


‘'ae Sunrise. Horus-Ra, wearing a disk encircled by a serpent, and standing 
beneath the vaulted heaven, being adored by seven apes, The Tet below has 
human arms and hands, which grasp the symbols of power of Osiris; on the 
left stands Isis, the “divine mother,” and on the right Nephthys. 
(From the Papyrus of Hu-nefer, plate 1.) 


(And the god saith :—) 
(40) “Thou shalt come forth into heaven, thou shalt 


78 HYMN TO RA 


“pass over the sky, thou shalt be joined unto the starry 
“deities. Praises shall be offered (41) unto thee in 
“thy boat, thou shalt be hymned in the Afet boat, (42) 
“thou shalt behold Ra within his shrine, thou shalt 
“set together with his Disk day by day, thou shalt 
‘see (43) the Ant! fish when it springeth into being in 
“the waters of turquoise, and thou shalt see (44) the 
“ Abfw' fish in his hour. It shall come to pass that the 
‘“Hivil One shall fall when he layeth a snare to destroy 
“thee, (45) and the joints of his neck and of his back 
“shall be hacked asunder. Ra [saileth] with a fair 
“wind, and the Sektet boat draweth on (46) and cometh 
“into port. The mariners of Ra rejoice, and the heart 
“of Neb-tankh* is glad, (47) for the enemy of her lord 
“hath fallen to the ground. Thou shalt behold Horus 
‘on the standing-place* of the pilot of the boat, and 
“Thoth and Maat shall stand one upon each side of 
“him. (48) All the gods shall rejoice when they 
‘behold Ra coming in peace (49) to make the hearts of 
“the shining ones to, live, and Osiris Ani, victorious, 

1 See the first Introductory Hymn, lines 15 and 16, and the 
note thereto (p. 6). 

2 T.e., ‘* Lady of life,” a name of Isis. 

* T.e., the little platform in the bows of the boat on which the 
pilot stands or sits. In the vignette to Chapter CXXXILI. it will 
be seen that some plaited object is hanging over the prow of the 
boat, and this I believe to represent a mat made of reeds and grass. 
The pilot of a Nile boat often has to sound the depth of the water 
under his boat, and this he does by means of a pole. As he lifts 
the pole out of the water, some drops fall on the place where he is 
standing, which eventually becomes wet and slippery; to secure a 
good foothold a reed-mat or layer of grass is thrown down, and I 


have seen a layer of sugar-canes also used as a mat, A straw mat, 
of course, serves the purpose better, 


HYMN TO THE SETTING SUN 79 


“the scribe of the divine offerings of the lord of Thebes, 


{» 


“shall be along with them 


A Hymn to the Setting Sun. 
[From the Papyrus of Mut-hetep (Brit, Mus. No. 10,010, sheet 5). ] 
Vignette : In this papyrus this Chapter is without a vignette. 


Text: I. (1) [ANorHER CHAPTER OF] THE MYSTERY 
OF THE TUAT (UNDERWORLD) AND OF PASSING THROUGH — 
THE UNSEEN NETHERWORLD, and of seeing the Disk 
when he setteth in Amentet, [when] he is adored by 
the gods and by the Khus in the underworld, and 
[when] the Soul (2) which dwelleth in Ra is made 
perfect. He is made mighty before Tem; he is made 
ereat before Osiris; he setteth his terror before the 
company of the gods who are the guides of the nether- 
world; he maketh long (?) (5) his steps and he maketh 
his face to enter (?) | with that of] the great god. Now 
every Khu, for whom these words shall have been said, 
shall come forth by day in any form which he is pleased 
to take ; (4) he shall gain power among the gods of the 
Tuat (underworld), and they shall recognize him as one 
of themselves ; and he shall enter in at the hidden gate 
with power. 

The lady (5) Mut-hetep, victorious, singeth hymns of 
praise to thee, [saying]: “O Ra-Tem, in thy splendid 


So HYMN TO THE SETTING SUN 


‘progress thou risest, and thou settest as a living being 
‘in the glories (6) of the western horizon ; thou settest 
“in thy territory which is in Manu.' Thy uraeus is 
“behind thee, thy uraeus is behind thee. Homage to 
“thee, O thou who art in peace, homage to thee, O 
“thou who art in peace. Thou art joined unto the 
“Kye of Tem,° and it chooseth (7) its powers of protec- 
“tion [to place] behind thy members. Thou goest forth 
“through heaven, thou travellest over the earth, and 
“thou journeyest onward. O Luminary, the northern 
‘and southern halves of heaven come to thee and they 
““ bow low in adoration, (8) and they pay homage unto 
“thee, day by day. The gods of Amentet rejoice in 
“thy beauties and the unseen places.sing hymns of 
“praise unto thee. Those who dwell in the Seltet 
“boat (9) go round about thee, and the Souls of the 
“Kast * pay homage to thee, and when they meet thy 
“Majesty they ery: ‘Come, come in peace!’ There is 
‘“‘a shout of welcome to thee (10), O lord of heaven and 
“governor of Amentet! Thou art acknowledged by 
“Tsis who seeth her son in thee, the lord of fear, the 
“mighty one of terror. Thou settest as a living being in 
(11) the hidden place. Thy father [Ta-|tunen raiseth 
“thee up and he placeth both his hands behind thee ; 
“thou becomest endowed with divine attributes in [thy] 


1 T.e., the mountain of the sunset. 

2 Like ‘‘ Hye of Horus” and ‘‘ Eye of Ra,” a name for a form of 
the Sun-god. 

* T.e., the Souls or Spirits who take the forms of apes immediately _ 
the sun has risen; see the vignettes on pp. 73—77, 


HYMN TO THE SETTING SUN 81 


“members of earth; thou wakest in peace and thou 
“settest (12) in Manu.' Grant thou that I may become 
“a being honoured before Osiris, and that I may come 
“to thee, O Ra-Tem! I have adored thee, therefore 
“do thou for me that which I wish. Grant thou (13) 


Tur Sunset. The Sun-god in the form of a hawk wearing a disk about to set 
in the West. The three hawk-headed figures on the right are called Horus, 
Mestha, and Hapi, and the three jackal-headed figures, Horus, Tuamautef, and 
Qebh-sennut. Below are seen Isis and Nephthys adoring the two Lion-gods, 
who represent the Evening Sun and the Morning Sun respectively. 
(From the Papyrus of Qenna, plate 3.) 


“that I may be victorious in the presence of the com- 
“pany of the gods. Thou art beautiful, O Ra, in thy 
“western horizon of Amentet, thou lord of Maat, thou 


1 T.e., the mountain of the sunset. 


VOD. I, G 


82 HYMN TO THE SETTING SUN 


“mighty one of fear, thou whose attributes are majestic, 
“OQ thou who art greatly (14) beloved by those who 
“dwell in the Tuat (underworld); thou shinest with 
“thy beams upon the beings that are therein per- 
“petually, and thou sendest forth thy light upon the 
“path of Re-stau. Thou openest up the path of the 
“double Lion-god,' thou settest the (15) gods upon 
[their] thrones, and the Khus in their abiding places. 
“The heart of Naarerf* is glad [when] Ra setteth, the 
“heart of Nadrerf is glad when Ra setteth.” 

“Hail, O ye gods of the land of Amentet who make 
“offerings and oblations unto (16) Ra-Tem, ascribe 
“ye glory [unto him when] ye meet him, Grasp ye 
“your weapons and overthrow ye the fiend Seba on 
“behalf of Ra, and (17) repulse the fiend Nebt on behalf 
“of Osiris. The gods of the land of Amentet rejoice 
“and lay hold upon the cords of the Sektet boat, and 
“they come in peace; (18) the gods of the hidden place 
“who dwell in Amentet triumph.” 

“Hail, Thoth, who didst make Osiris to triumph over 
“his enemies, make thou Mut-hetep, victorious, to 
‘triumph over her enemies (19) in the presence of the 
“oreat divine sovereign chiefs who live with Osiris, the 
“Jord of life. The great god who dwelleth in his Disk 
“cometh forth, that is, Horus the avenger of his father, 
“Unnefer-Ra. (20) Osiris setteth, and the Khu{s] who 


1 See the accompanying vignette, and that of Chapter XVII., 
p. 94. : 
2 T.e., An-rut-f, the place where nothing groweth. 


HYMN: TO THE-SETTING SUN 


c 
Oo 


“are in the ‘luat (underworld) say: Homage to thee, O 
‘thou who comest as Tem, and who comest into being 
‘‘as the creator of the gods. Homage to thee, O thou 
‘““who comest as the holy Soul of souls, who dwellest in 
‘the horizon. Homage to thee who art more glorious 
“than [all] the gods and who illuminest the Tuat with 
“thine Kye. Homage to thee who sailest in thy glory 
“and who goest round about in thy Disk.” 


A Hymn to the Setting Sun. 


[From the Papyrus of Nekhtu-Amen (Naville, op. cit., Bd. II. 
p- 23). ] 
Vignette I.: The deceased standing in adoration before the 
Sun-god, who is spearing a serpent. 
Vignette II.: The deceased spearing a serpent; compare 
the vignette to Chapter XXXIX. The following vignette, in 
which the deceased is seen kneeling in adoration before Ra 
in company with certain gods, is taken from the Papyrus of 
Qenna (plate 17). 


Text : ANOTHER CHAPTER OF THE MYSTERY OF THE 
TUAT (UNDERWORLD) AND OF TRAVERSING THE UNSEEN 


84 HYMN TO THE SETTING SUN 


PLACES OF THE UNDERWORLD, of seeing the Disk when 
he setteth in Amentet, [when] he is adored by the gods 
and by the Khus of the Tuat (underworld), and [when] 
the divine Khu which dwelleth within Ra is made 
perfect. He setteth his might before Ra, he setteth 
his power before Tem, [he setteth his strength] before 
Khenti-Amentet, and he setteth his terror before the 
company of the gods. The Osiris of the gods goeth as 
leader through the Tuat (underworld), he crasheth 
through mountains, he bursteth through rocks, he 
maketh glad (?) the heart of every Khu. ‘This com- 
position shall be recited by the deceased when he 
cometh forth and when he goeth in with the gods, 
among whom he findeth no opposition ; then shall he 
come forth by day in all the manifold and exceedingly 
numerous forms which he may be pleased to take. 
(The: Osiris 7 saith :—-| 

“A hymn of praise to Ra at eventide [when] he 
“‘setteth as a living being in Baakha.' The great god 
“who dwelleth in his Disk riseth in his Two Hyes* and 
“all the Khus of the underworld receive him in his 
“horizon of Amentet ; they shout praises unto Heru- 
“kkhuti (Harmachis) in his form of Tem, and they sing 
“hymns of joy to Ra when they have received him at 
“the head of his beautiful path of Amentet.” 


' I.e., The mountain of Sunrise, but the scribe appears to have 
eee 
written J wl roms ® Baakha, instead of Manu. 
* T.e., the Sun and the Moon. 


HYMN DO THE sETTING SUN 85 


He (i.e., the deceased) saith : “ Praise be unto thee, 
“OQ Ra, praise be unto thee, O Tem, in thy splendid 
“progress. Thou hast risen and thou hast put on 
“strength, and thou settest like a living being amid thy 
“ olories in the horizon of Amentet, in thy domain which 
“isinManu. ‘Thy uraeus-goddess is behind thee; thy 
“uraeus-goddess is behind thee. Hail to thee, in peace ; 
“hail to thee, in peace. Thou joinest thyself unto the 
“ Hye of Horus, and thou hidest thyself within its secret 
“place; it destroyeth for thee all the convulsions of thy 
“face, it maketh thee strong with life, and thou livest. 
“Tt bindeth its protecting amulets behind thy members. 
“Thou sailest forth over heaven, and thou makest the 
“earth to be stablished ; thou joinest thyself unto the 
“upper heaven, O Luminary. The two regions of the 
“Hast and West make adoration unto thee, bowing 
“low and paying homage unto thee and they praise 
“thee day by day; the gods of Amentet rejoice in thy 
“splendid beauties. The hidden places adore thee, the 
“aged ones make offerings unto thee, and they create 
“for thee protecting powers. The divine beings who 
“dwell in the eastern and western horizons transport 
“thee, and those who are in the Sektet boat convey 
“thee round and about. The Souls of Amentet cry 
“out unto thee and say unto thee when they meet thy 
“majesty (Life, Health, Strength!) ‘AJI hail, all hail!’ 
“When thou comest forth in peace there arise shouts 
“of delight to thee, O thou lord of heaven, thou Prince 
“of Amentet. Thy mother Isis embraceth thee, and in 


86 HYMN TO THE SETTING SUN 


“thee she recognizeth her son, the lord of fear, the 
“mighty one of terror. Thou settest as a living being 
‘within the dark portal. Thy father Tatunen lifteth 
“thee up and he stretcheth out his two hands behind 
“thee; thou becomest a divine being in the earth. 
“Thou wakest as thou settest, and thy habitation is in 
“Manu. Grant thou that I may be venerated before 
“Osiris, and come thou [to me], O Ra-Tem. Since 
“thou hast been adored [by me] that which I wish 
“thou shalt do for me day by day. Grant thou victory 
“lunto me] before the great company of the gods, O Ra 
“who art doubly beautiful in thy horizon of Amentet, 
“thou lord of Maat who dwellest in the horizon. The 
“fear of thee is great, thy forms are majestic, and the 
“love of thee is great among those who dwell in the 
“underworld.” 


A Hymn to the Setting Sun. 


From a Papyrus of the XIXth Dynasty preserved at Dublin (see 
PY ynasuy | 
Naville, Podtenbuch, Bd. 1. Bl, 19). ] 


Vignette: The deceased and his wife! standing with both 
hands raised in adoration before a table of offerings, upon 
which are a libation vase and lotus flowers. 


Text: (1) A Hymn or Praise To RA-HeErvu-(2) 
Kauutt (RA-HARMACHIS) WHEN HE SETTETH IN (3) 
| The general treatment of the figures resembles that followed 


by the artist in the Papyrus Hu-nefer; the man, however, has a 
fillet round his head. 


HYMN TO THE SETTING SUN 87 


THE WESTERN PART OF HEAVEN. He (7.e., the deceased) 
saith :— 

‘Homage to thee, (4) O Ra [who] in thy setting art 
“(5) Tem-Heru-khuti (Tem-Harmachis) (6) thou divine 
“god, thou self-created (7) being, thou primeval matter 
“from which all things were made}. When [thou] 
“appearest (8) in the bows of [thy] bark men shout for 
“joy at (9) thee, O maker of the gods! (10) Thou didst 
“stretch out the heavens wherein thy two eyes! might 
“travel, thou didst make the earth to be a vast chamber 
“for thy Khus,? so that (11) every man might know his 
“fellow. The Sektet boat is glad, and the Mdtet boat 
“yejoiceth ; (12) and they greet thee with exultation 
‘as thou journeyest along. The god Nu is content 
“and thy (13) mariners are satisfied; the uraeus- 
“ooddess hath overthrown thine enemies, and thou 
“hast carried off the legs of Apep. Thou art beautiful, 
“(14) O Ra, each day, and thy mother Nut embraceth 
“thee; thou settest in beauty, and thy heart is glad 
“(15) in the horizon of Manu, and the holy beings 
“therein rejoice. (16) Thou shinest there with thy 
“beams, O thou great god, Osiris, the everlasting 
“Prince, The lords of (17) the zones of the Tuat in 
“their caverns stretch out their hands in adoration 
“before (18) thy Aa (double), and they cry out to thee, 
“and they all come forth in the train of thy form 
“shining brilliantly. (19) The hearts of the lords of 


! T.e., the Sun and Moon, E 
* I.e., the beatified dead and the gods of heaven. 


88 HYMN TO THE SETTING SUN 


“the Tuat (underworld) are glad when thou (20) 
“sendest forth thy glorious light in Amentet; their 
“two eyes are directed towards thee, (21) and they 
“press forward to see thee, and their hearts rejoice 
“when they do see thee. Thou hearkenest unto (22) 
“the acclamations of those that are in the funeral 
“chest,! thou doest away with their helplessness and 
“drivest away the evils which are about (23) them. 
“Thou givest breath to their nostrils and they take 
“hold of the bows of thy bark (24) in the horizon of 
“Manu. Thou art beautiful each day, O Ra, and may 
“thy mother Nut embrace Osiris... ... *, victorious.” 


CHAPTER XVI. 


The scene to which Lepsius inadvertently gave the 
number XVI. and which he regarded as a Chapter of 
the Book of the Dead is, strictly speaking, only a 
vignette intended to accompany the hymn to the rising 
Sun that forms part of the introductory matter to the 
Chapters of the Book of the Dead which we find in 
some of the oldest papyri of the Theban period. In 
the Papyrus of Ani* we see the Sun’s disk supported 
by a pair of arms which emerge from the sign of life ; 

! T.e., the dead. 


* The name of the deceased is wanting. 
3 See above, page 73. 


VIGNETTES OF THE SUNSET 89 


this, in its turn, is supported by the pillar which 
symbolizes the tree-trunk which contained the dead 
body of Osiris. This pillar rests upon the horizon, 
On each side of it are three apes typical of the Spirits 
of the Dawn, adoring the disk; on the right is the 
goddess Nephthys and on the left is the goddess Isis, 
Nephthys kneels upon the symbol of the sunset, and 
Isis upon the symbol of the dawn. Above the whole 
scene is the vaulted sky. In the Papyrus of Hu-nefer! 
the pillar is endowed with human arms and hands, 
which grasp the crook and flail, emblematic of Osiris’ 
reign and rule, and the two goddesses are standing up- 
right; one says: “Iam thy sister Nephthys,” and the 
other: “I am thy sister Isis, the divine mother.” The 
sun is typified by a hawk having a disk, encircled by 
an uraeus, upon his head. The apes are here seven in 
number, four stand in front and three behind; above 
the whole scene is the vaulted sky. 

Certain papyri have also vignettes which illustrate 
the hymns to the setting sun.” In this case the hawk 
usually stands upon the emblem of the West, while 
apes and gods adore him. In the Papyrus of Qenna on 
the right three hawk-headed gods kneel in adoration 
with their left arms raised, and on the left three 
jackal-headed gods, with their right arms raised in 
adoration. Below, two lion-headed gods, with disks on 
their heads, are seated back to back in a cluster of 


! See above, page 77. 2 See above, pages 81, 83. 


go BOOK OF THE DEAD 


lotus flowers; these typify dawn and eventide. The 
goddess Isis kneels in adoration before the lion of the 
dawn, and the goddess Nephthys before the lion of 
eventide, 


CHAPTER XVII.—VIGNETTEs. 


[From the Papyrus of Ani (Brit. Mus. No. 10,470, sheets 7—10). ] 


I. - Itt, 


Vignette: Plate 7. I. Aniand his wife seated in a hall; he 
is moving a piece on a draught-board (see lines 3 and 4 of the 
text). 

II. The souls of Ani and his wife, in the form of human- 
headed hawks standing upon a pylon-shaped building; the 
bearded soul is described as “ the soul of Osiris.” 

III. A table of offerings upon which are lotus flowers, a liba- 
tion vase, &e. 

IV. Two lions seated back to back and supporting the 
horizon with the sun’s disk, over which extends the sky; the 
lion on the right is called Sef, z.e., ‘ Yesterday,” and that on 
the left Tuau, i.e., “ To-day” (see lines 13—16 of the text). 

V. The Bennu bird and a table of offerings (see lines 26—30 
of the text). 

VI. The mummy of Ani on a bier within a funeral shrine; at 
the head and foot are Nephthys and Isis in the form of hawks. 
Beneath the bier are Ani’s palette, variegated marble or glass 
vessels, &e, 


VIGNETTES OF CHAPTER XVII. gI 


Plate 8. I. The god of “ Millions of years”; on his head and 
in his right hand is the emblem of “years.” His left hand is 
stretched out over a pool containing the Eye of Horus (see 
line 45 of the text), 

II. The god Uatchet-ura (7e., “Great Green Water”), with 
each hand extended over a pool; that under his right hand is 
called “ Lake of Natron,” and that under his left hand, “ Lake 
of Nitre ” (see lines 46—50 of the text). 

III. A pylon with doors, called Re-stau, 7.c., the “ Gate of the 
passages of the tomb ” (see lines 56—458 of the text). 

IV. The Utchat, facing to the left, above a pylon (see line 73 
of the text). 

V. The cow “ Meh-urt the eye of Ra,” with disk and horns, 
collar and menat and whip (see lines 75—79 of the text). 

VI. A funeral chest from which emerge the head of Ra and 
his two arms and hands, each holding the emblem of life. The 
chest, which is called “the district of Abtu (Abydos),” or “ the 
burial-place of the East,” has upon its sides figures of the four 
children of Horus, who protect the intestines of Osiris or the 
deceased. On the right stand Tuamautef and Qebhsennuf, and 
on the left Mestha and Hapi (see lines 82 and 83 of the text). 

Plate 9. I. Figures of three gods who, together with Mestha, 
Hapi, Tuamautef and Qebhsennuf are the “ seven Ahus” referred 
to in line 99 of the text. Their names are:—Maa-atef-f,! 
Kheri-beq-f,? and Heru-khenti{an-|maati (or merti). 

II. The god Anpn (Anubis) jackal-headed. 

IIT. Figures of seven gods, whose names are: Netchehnet- 
cheh, Aaqet-qet,4 Khenti-heh-f,5 Ami-unnut-f,° Tesher-maa,? 
Bes-maa-em-kerh,’ and An-em-hru® (see lines 99—106 of the 
text). 

** He who looketh upon his father.” 

‘* He who is under his olive tree.” 

‘** Horus in blindness.” 

‘“He who is mighty in revolving.’ 
. ** He dwelleth in his flame.” 

® T.e., ‘* He who is in his hour.” 

7 T.e., ‘* Red of both eyes.” 

8 T.e., ‘‘ Flame seeing in the night,” 

9 T.e., ‘‘ Bringing by day.” 


’ 


Q2 EXISTENCE IN AMENTET [Chap, xvii. 1 


IV. The soul of Ra, in the form of a hawk with a disk on his 
head, conversing in Tattu with the soul of Osiris in the form of 
a human-headed bird wearing the white crown; this scene is of 
the rarest occurrence (see lines 111 and 112 of the text). 

Plate 10. I. The Cat, emblematic of the Sun, cutting off the 
head of the serpent Apep or Apepi, typical of darkness. 

II. Ani and his wife Thuthu, kneeling in adoration before 
the god Khepera, beetle-headed, who is seated in the boat of 
the rising sun (see lines 116 ff. of the text). 

IIL. Two apes, emblematic of the goddesses Isis and Nephthys 
(see lines 124 and 125 of the text). 

IV. The god Tem, seated within the Sun-disk in the boat of 
the setting sun. 

V. The god Rehu, in the form of a lion (see line 183 of the 
text). 

VI. The serpent Uatchet, the lady of flame, a symbol of the 
Kye of Ra, coiled round a lotus flower, Above is the emblem 
of fire. 


CHAPTER XVII.—TrExts. , 


[From the Papyrus of Ani (Brit. Mus. No. 10,470, sheets 7—10), 
and from the Papyrus of Nebseni (Brit. Mus. No, 9,900, sheet 14, 
1. 16 ff.).] 

Text: (1) HmrRE BEGIN THE PRAISES AND GLORI- 
FYINGS OF COMING OUT FROM AND OF GOING INTO 
THE GLORIOUS UNDERWORLD WHICH IS IN THE 
BEAUTIFUL AMENTET, OF COMING OUT (2) BY DAY 
IN ALL THE FORMS OF EXISTENCE WHICH PLEASE HIM 
(i.e, THE DECEASED), OF PLAYING AT DRAUGHTS AND 
SITTING IN THE HALL, AND OF COMING FORTH (3) AS 
A LIVING SOUL. 


Chap. xvii. 13] RA THE SELF-BEGOTTEN 93 


Saith Osiris, the scribe Ani, (4) after he hath come 
to his haven of rest—it is good for [a man] to recite 
[this work whilst he is] upon earth, for [then] all the 
words of (5) Tem come to pass :— 

“Tam the god Tem in rising; I am the only One. 
“T came into existence in (6) Nu. Iam Ra who rose 
“in the beginning, the ruler of... . this.” ! (7) 

Who then is this ? 

It is Ra when at the beginning he rose in (8) the 
city of Suten-henen (Heracleopolis Magna), crowned 
like a king in [his] rising. The pillars? of the god 
Shu* were not as yet created, when he was (9) upon the 
high ground’ of him that dwelleth in Khemennu 
(Hermopolis Magna). 

“Tam the great god who gave birth to himself, even 
“Nu, (10) who made his name[s to become] the company 
“of the gods as god.” 

Who then (11) is this? 

It is Ra, the creator of the name[s] of his limbs, 
which came into being (12) in the form of the gods who 
are in the train of Ra. 

“Tam he whois not driven back among the gods.” 
(13) 

Who then is this? 


1 Var. “‘ the ruler of what he hath made” (Papyrus of Nebseni), 


2 T.e., the cardinal points. 
3 Shu was the first-born son of Ra, by the goddess Hathor, the 
sky ; he typified the light, and lifted up the sky (Nut) from the 


earth (Seb), and placed it upon the steps a which were in Khe- 
mennu (Hermopolis). 
4 Or ‘‘ stair-case.” 


94 YESTERDAY AND TO-DAY (Chap. xvii. 14 


It is Tem the dweller in his disk, or (as others say), 
(14) It is Ra in his rising in the eastern horizon of 
heaven. 


“Tam Yesterday ; I know (15) To-day.” 

Who then is this? 

Yesterday is Osiris, (16) and To-day is Ra on the 
day when he shall destroy the enemies of Neb-er-tcher,' 
(17) and when he shall establish as prince and ruler his 
son (18) Horus, or (as others say), on the day when we 
commemorate the festival (19) of the meeting of the 
dead Osiris with his father Ra, and when the battle of 
the (20) gods was fought in which Osiris, the lord of 
Amentet, was the leader. 

What then is this? (21) 

It is Amentet, [that is to say| the creation of the 
souls of the gods when Osiris was leader in Set- 
Amentet ; or (22) (as others say), It is Amentet 
which Ra hath given unto me; when any god cometh, 
he doth arise and (23) doeth battle for it. 

“T know the god who dwelleth therein,” (24) 

1 f.e., Osiris. 


2 Le., the ‘Mountain of Amentet,” or the ‘‘Mountain of the 
Underworld.” 


Chap. xvii. 35] OSIRIS AND THE BENNU 95 


Who then is this? 

It is Osiris; or (as others say), Ra is his name, (or) 
It is the (25) phallus of Ra wherewith he was united to 
himself. 

“Tam the Bennu bird (26) which is in Annu (Helio- 
“ polis), and I am the keeper of the volume of the book 
‘of things which are and of things which shall be.” 

Who then (27) is this ? 


en || 
oa 


The dead body of Osiris on his bier, 


It is Osiris; or (as others say), It is his dead body, 
or (as others say), (28) It is his filth. The things 
which are and the things which shall be are his dead 
body; or (as others say), (29) They are eternity and 
everlastingness. Hternity is the day, and everlasting- 
ness is the (30) night. 

“Tam the god Amsu in his coming forth; may his 
“two plumes (31) be set upon my head for me.” 

Who then is this ? 

Amsu is Horus, the avenger (32) of his father, and 
his coming forth is his birth. The plumes (33) upon 
his head are Isis and Nephthys when they go forth to 
set themselves (34) there, even as his protectors, and 
they provide that which his head (85) lacketh, or (as 


96 PURIFICATION OF OSIRIS (Chap. xvii. 35 


others say), They are the two exceeding great urael 
which are upon the head of their father (86) Tem, or 
(as others say), His two eyes are the two plumes which 
are upon his head. 

“ Osiris Ani, (37) the scribe of all the holy offerings, 
“yiseth up in his place in triumph, he cometh into (38) 
“his city.” 

What then is this ? 

It is the horizon of his father Tem. (39) 

“T have made an end of my short-comings, and I 
“have put away my faults.” 

What then (40) is this ? 

“Tt is the cutting off of the corruptible in the body 
“of Osiris, the scribe Ani, (41) victorious before all the 
“oods; and all his faults are driven out.” 

What (42) then is this? 

It is the purification [of Osiris] on the day of his 
birth. (43) 

“T am purified in my great double nest which is in 
“Suten-henen (Heracleopolis Magna), (44) on the day 
“of the offerings of the followers of the great god who 
“is (45) therein.” 


The god of Great Green Lake, Re-stan, The Utchat, 
Millions of Years. 


Chap. xvii. 59] RE-STAU AND THE TUAT Q7 


What then is this ? 

“Millions of years” is the name of the one [nest], 
“Great Green Lake” (46) is the name of the other; a 
pool of natron, and a pool of nitre (47); or (as others 


? 


say), “The Traverser of millions of years” is the name 
of one, “ Great Green Lake” (48) is the name of the 
other; or (as others say), “ The Begetter of millions of 
years” is the name of one, “ Great Green Lake ” (49) is 
the name of the other. Now as concerning the great 
god who dwelleth therein, it is Ra (50) himself, 

“T pass over the way, I know the head of the Pool of 
Maati.” (51) 

What then is this ? 

It is Re-stau; that is to say, it is the underworld on 
the (52) south of Na-arut-f,' and it is the northern door 
of the tomb. ’ 

Now as concerning (53) the Pool of Maati, it is Abtu 
(Abydos) ; or (as others say), It is the way by which 
his father (54) Tem travelleth when he goeth forth to 
Sekhet-Aaru, (55) which bringeth forth the food and 
nourishment of the gods who are behind | their] shrines. 
(56) Now the gate of Tchesert is the gate of the pillars 
of Shu, (57) the northern gate of the Tuat (under- 
world); or (as others say), It is the two leaves of the 
door (58) through which the god Tem passeth when he 
goeth forth to the eastern horizon of heaven. (59) 

““Q ye gods who are in the presence [of Osiris], grant 


1 Or An-rut-f, the “ place where nothing groweth.” 
VOLE tT, H 


98 THE FIGHT BETWEEN HORUS AND SET (Chap. xvii. 60 


“me your arms, for Iam the god who (60) shall come 
“into being among you.” 

Who then are these ? 

They are the drops of blood which (61) came forth 
' from the phallus of Ra when he went forth to perform 
mutilation (62) upon himself. They sprang into being 
as the gods Hu and Sa, who are in the following (63) of 
Ra, and who accompany (64) the god Tem daily and 
every day. 

“T, Osiris, the scribe Ani, triumphant, (65) have 
‘filled for thee the Utchat after it had suffered failure 
‘“(66) on the day of the combat of the two Fighters” 
(.e., Horus and Set). 

What then (67) is this ? 

It is the day on which Horus fought with Set, (68) 
who cast filth in the face of Horus, and when Horus 
destroyed the members (69) of Set. Now this Thoth 
did with his own fingers. 

“T lift up the (70) hair{-cloud] when there are 
“storms and quakings in the sky.” 

What then is this? (71) 

It is the right Hye of Ra, which raged against [Set | 
when (72) he sent it forth, 

Thoth raised up the hair[-cloud], and brought the 
Eye (73) alive, and whole, and sound, and without 
defect to [its] lord; or (as others say), It is the Kye of 
ta when it is sick and when it (74) weepeth for its 
fellow-eye ; then Thoth standeth up to cleanse it. (75) 

“T behold Ra who was born yesterday from the 


Chap. xvii. 86] THE GODS IN THE TRAIN OF HORUS 99 


“buttocks of (76) the goddess Meh-urt ; his strength 


“is my strength, and my strength is his strength.” 


Meh-urt, The gods in the train of Horus, 


What then is this? (77) 

It is the watery abyss of heaven, or (as others say), 
It is the image (78) of the Eye of Ra in the morning at 
his daily birth. (79) Meh-urt is the Eye (Utchat) of 
Ra. Therefore Osiris, (80) the scribe Ani, triumphant, 
is a great one among the gods who are in the train of 
(81) Horus. The words are spoken for him that loveth 
his lord. . 

What (82) then is this ? 

{|The gods who are in the train of Horus are] Mestha, 
Hapi, Tuamautef, and Qebhsennuf.' 

(83) “Homage to you, O ye lords of right and truth, 
“ye sovereign princes who [stand] behind Osiris, who 
“utterly do away with (84) sins and crimes and who 
‘are ip the following of the goddess Hetep-sekhus, (85) 
“orant [ye] that I may come unto you. Destroy ye 
“lall] the faults which (86) are within me, even as ye 


! These four are the gods of the cardinal points, and each 
watched oyer a portion of the intestines of the deceased, 


I00 THE GODS OF THE NORTHERN SKY  [Chap. xvii. 87 


“did for the Seven Spirits! (87) who are among the 
‘followers of their lord Sepa.* Anubis appointed (88) 
“their place on the day [when was said], ‘ Come therefore 
“ thither,’ ” 


The Three Spirits and Anubis, 


What then (89) is this ? 

These lords of right and truth are Thoth and (90) 
Astes,* the lord of Amentet. The sovereign princes 
[who stand] behind Osiris, even Mestha, (91) Hapi, 
Tuamautef, and Qebhsennuf, are they who are (92) 
behind the Thigh in the northern sky. 

Now those who do utterly away with (93) sins and 
crimes and who are in the following of Hetep-sekhus 
(94) are the god Sebek [and his company] who dwell 
in the water. 

The goddess Hetep-sekhus is the Hye of (95) Ra; or 
(as others say), It is the flame which followeth after 
Osiris to burn up (96) the souls of his enemies, 

As concerning all the faults which are in (97) Osiris, 
the scribe of the offerings of all the gods, Ani, trium- 

1 The Seven Khus have been identified with the seven stars of 
the constellation of the Great Bear. 


2 A name of Osiris. 
’ This god was an associate of Osiris and Anubis, 


Chap. xvii.108] THE SEVEN GREAT SPIRITS IoL 


phant, [this is all that he hath done against the lords 
of eternity] since he came forth from (98) his mother’s 
womb. 


The Seven Spirits. 


As concerning the Seven Spirits (99), even Mestha, 
Hapi, Tuamautef, Qebhsennuf, (100) Maa-atef-f, Kheri- 
beq-f, and Herukhenti-[an]maati, (101) Anubis ap- 
pointed them to be protectors of the dead body of Osiris, 
or (as others say), [set them] (102) behind the place of 
purification of Osiris; or (as others say), those Seven 
Spirits are (103) Netcheh-netcheh, Aatqetqet,'! Anerta- 
nef-bes-f-khenti-heh-(104)f? Aq-her-ami-unnut-f,> Tesh- 
ermaati-dmi-(105)het-Anes,! Ubes-hra-per-em-khet- 
khet,? and (106) Maa-em-kerh-an-nef-em-hru.® The 
chief of the sovereign princes (107) who are in Na- 
irut-f is Horus, the avenger of his father. 

As concerning (108) the day [upon which was said], 


“Come therefore thither,” it referreth to the words, 


I.e., ‘‘ He who is mighty in revolving.” 


‘“'The dweller in his flame giveth not his flame.” 

*“ He entereth in his hour.” 

“The Red-eyed one in the house of Anes.” 

‘The Fiery-face who cometh onwards and retreateth,” 


1 
Sy ys 
4 

D ‘* He seeth in the dark and bringeth in the day.” 


102 OSIRIS AND RA IN TATTU _ [Chap. xvii, 109 


“Come (109) then thither,” which Ra spake unto 
Osiris. Lo, may this be said unto me in Amentet! 

‘Tam the divine Soul which dwelleth in the divine 
Twin-Gods.” (110) 


The Souls of Ra and Osiris in Tattu. 


What then is this? 

It is Osiris [when] he goeth into Tattu (111) and 
findeth there the Soul of Ra; there the one god em- 
braceth (112) the other, and divine souls spring into 
being within the divine 'win-Gods. 

[The following lines are from the Papyrus of Nebseni (Brit. Mus. 
No. 9900, sheet 14, 1. 16 ff.).] 

(16) As concerning the divine Twin-Gods they are 
Heru-netch-hra-tef-f ! (17) and [Jeru-khent-an-maati ; 
or (as others say), the double divine Soul which 
dwelleth in the divine Twin-Gods is the Soul of Ra 
and the Soul of Osiris ; [or (as others say),| It is the 


1 T.e., * Horus, the avenger of his father (Osiris).” 
2 T.e., ‘‘ Horus, the dweller in darkness,” ¢.e., Blind Horus. 


Chap. xvii. 22] THE CAT BY THE PERSEA TREE 103 


Soul (18) which dwelleth in Shu, [and] the Soul which 
dwelleth in Tefnut,! and these are the double divine 
Soul which dwelleth in Tattu. 

“Tam the Cat which fought (?) hard by the Persea 
“tree (19) in Annu (Heliopolis), on the night when the 
“foes of Neb-er-tcher were destroyed.” 


Ras 


& 


ose 
S Ae, 
5 6 
ast : *e 
a TO PBEM CL 
z. CY Basa paw 
mate thes Sf . 
ol ‘e) % x ¥ 
spe! 
7 ‘Ase 


From the Papyrus of Ani, From the Papyrus of Hu-nefer. 


Who then is this? 

The male Cat is Ra (20) himself, and he is called 
‘Mau’ by reason of the speech of the god Sa, [who 
said] concerning him: “ He is like (maw) unto that 
which he hath made” ; thus his name became ‘ Mau’ ; ” 
or (as others say), it is the god (21) Shu who maketh 
over the possessions of Seb to Osiris. 

As concerning the fight (?) hard by the Persea tree 
in Annu, it concerneth the children of impotent revolt 
when (22) justice is wrought on them for what they 
have done. 

‘ I.e., the feminine counterpart of Shu. 


2 This is a very ancient pun on the words mau ‘‘cat” and mdw 
“like.” 


I04 THE HEADSMAN OF OSIRIS (Chap, xvii. 22 


As concerning the night of the battle [these words 
refer to] the inroad [of the children of impotent revolt] 
into the eastern part of heaven, whereupon there arose 
a battle in heaven and in all the earth. 

“O thou who art in thine egg (23) (7.c., Ra), who 
“shinest from thy Disk and risest in thy horizon, and 
‘dost shine like gold above the sky, like unto whom 
“there is none among the gods, who sailest over the 
“pillars (24) of Shu (i.e, in the ether), who givest 
“blasts of fire from thy mouth, [who makest the two 
“lands bright with thy radiance, deliver] thou the 
‘pious Nebseni from the god (25) whose form is hidden, 
“whose eyebrows are like unto the two arms of the 
‘Balance on the night of reckoning destruction.” 

Who then is this? 

It is An-a-f (i.¢.,1 the god who bringeth his arm), (26) 

As concerning “the night of reckoning destruction,” 
it is the night of the burning of the damned, and of the 
overthrow of the wicked at the block, (27) and of the 
slaughter of souls. 

Who then is this? 

It is Nemu, the headsman of Osiris, or (as others 
say), It is Apep when he riseth up with one head bear- 
ing Maat (i.e, right and truth) [upon it]; (28) or (as 
others say), It is Horus when he riseth up with a 
double head, whereof the one beareth right and truth 
and the other wickedness. (29) He bestoweth wicked- 


1 A name of Amsu, the god of generating power and fertility. 


Chap. xvii. 36] THE KNIVES OF TORTURE 105 


ness on him that worketh wickedness, and right and 
truth upon him that followeth righteousness and truth; 
or (as others say), It is Horus the Great who (30) 
dwelleth in Sekhem (Letopolis) ; or (as others say), It 
is Thoth; or (as others say), It is Nefer-Tem; [or 
(as others say),| It is Sept who doth thwart the acts of 
the foes of Neb-er-tcher. 

“Deliver thou the scribe Nebseni, victorious, from 
“the Watchers who bear slaughtering knives, and who 
“have cruel fingers, and who slay those who are in the 
“following of Osiris. (31) May they never gain the 
‘mastery over me, may I never fall under their knives.” 

What then is this? 

It is Anubis, and it is Horus in the form of Khent- 
(32)an-maati; or (as others say), It is the sovereign 
princes who thwart the works of their weapons ; or (as 
others say), It is the chiefs of the Sheniw! chamber. 

“ May (33) their knives never gain the mastery over 
“me, may I never fall under their instruments of 
“cruelty, for (84) I know their names, and I know the 
“being Matchet who is among them in the House of 
“Osiris, shooting rays of light from [his] eye, but who 
“himself is unseen. (35) He goeth round about 
“heaven robed in the flame of his mouth, commanding 
“Wlapi, but remaining himself unseen. May I be 
“strong upon earth before Ra, may I come happily 
“into haven (36) in the presence of Osiris. Let not 


! A place where tortures were inflicted on the enemies of Ra. 


106 THE WATCHER OF AMENTET (Chap. xvii. 36 


“your offermgs be wanting to me, O ye who preside 
“over your altars, for I am among those who follow 
‘after Neb-er-tcher according to the writings (37) of 
“Khepera. I fly as a hawk, I cackle as a goose; I 
“ever slay, even as the serpent goddess Neheb-ka,” 

What then is this? (38) 

Those who preside over their altars are the similitude 
of the Kye of Ra and the similitude of the Eye of 
Horus. 

“Q Ra- (39) Tem, thou lord of the Great House,! 
“thou Sovereign (Life, Strength and Health!) of all 
“the gods, deliver thou the scribe Nebseni, victorious, 
“from the god whose face (40) is like unto that of a 
‘“oreyhound, whose brows are as those of a man, and 
“who feedeth upon the dead, who watcheth at the 
“Bight of the Lake (41) of Fire, and who devoureth 
“the bodies of the dead and swalloweth hearts, and 
“who shooteth forth filth, but he himself remaineth ; 
“unseen.” 

Who then is (42) this ? 

‘“ Devourer for millions of years” is his name, and he 
liveth in the Aat. As concerning the Aat of flame, 
it is that which is in Anrut-f, hard by (48) the Sheniw 
chamber. The unclean man who would walk thereover 
doth fall down among the knives; or (as others say), 
His name is “ Mates,”* (44) and he is the Watcher of 


1 T.e., the great temple of Ra in Heliopolis. 
? Var. ‘‘and he dwelleth in the Lake of Unt.” 
® T.e., ‘he who hath the flint knife.” 


Chap. xvii. 49] THE SOVEREIGNTY OF OSIRIS 107 


the door of Amentet ; or (as others say), His name is 
‘“Beba,” and it is he who watcheth the Bight of 
Amentet; or (as others say), “ Heri-sep-f” is his name. 

“ Hail, Lord of terror, chief of the lands of the North 
“and South, thou lord of the red glow (or red lands), 
(45) who preparest the slaughter-block, and who dost 
“feed upon the inward parts!” 

Who then is this? 

The guardian of the Bight of Amentet. (46) 

What then is this ? 

It is the heart of Osiris, which is the devourer of all 
slaughtered things. The Ureret crown hath been given 
unto him with gladness of heart as lord of Suten-henen 
(Heracleopolis Magna). 

What then (47) is this ? 

He to whom hath been given the Ureret crown 
with gladness of heart as lord of Suten-henen is 
Osiris. He was bidden to rule among the gods on 
the day of the union of earth (48) in the presence of 
Neb-er-tcher. 

What then is this ? 

He that was bidden to rule among the gods is 
[Horus] the son of Isis, who was appointed to rule in 
the place of his father (49) Osiris. As concerning the 
“day of the union of earth with earth,” it is the 
mingling of earth with earth in the coffin of Osiris, the 
Soul that liveth in Suten-henen, the giver of meat and 
drink, the destroyer of wrong, and the guide of the 
everlasting paths. 


108 PRAYER TO KHEPERA [Chap, avii. 213 


Who then is this ? 
It is Ra himself. 
“Deliver thou the Osiris Nebseni, victorious,” 


[The following lines are from the Papyrus of Ani (Brit. Mus. 
No. 10,470, sheet 10, 1. 7 ff.).] 


(113) from the great god who carrieth away the soul, 
‘who eateth hearts, and who feedeth upon (114) offal, 
“the guardian of the darkness, the dweller in the Seker 
“boat; those who live in crime (115) fear him.” 

Who then is this? 

It is Suti, or (as others say), It is Smam-ur, (116) 
the soul of Seb. 


The deceased and his wife adoring Khepera. The Two Apes. 


‘“ Hail, Khepera in thy boat, the two-fold company of 
“the gods is thy body! Deliver thou Osiris (117) Ani, 
“victorious, from the Watchers who give judgment, 
“who have been appointed by the god Neb-er-tcher 
(118) to protect him and to fasten the fetters on his 
‘foes, and who slaughter in the (119) shambles ; there 
“is no escape from their grasp. May they never stab 
“me with their knives, (120) may I never fall helpless 
‘into their chambers of torture. (121) Never have the 


Chap, xvii. 132] THE CHAMBER OF TORTURE 10g 


“things which the gods hate been done by me, for I 
“am pure within the Mesqget.' (122) Cakes of saffron 
“have been brought unto him in Tanenet.” 

Who then is this ? (123) 

It is Khepera in his boat. It is Ra himself. As 
concerning the Watchers (124) who give judgment, 
they are the apes Isis and Nephthys. As concerning 
the things which are abominated by the gods they are 
wickedness (125) and falsehood; and he who passeth 
through the place of purification within the Mesget is 
Anpu (Anubis), who is behind the chest (126) which 
containeth the inward parts of Osiris. He to whom 
saffron cakes have been brought (127) in Tanenet is 
Osiris ; or (as others say), The saffron cakes (128) in 
Tanenet are heaven and earth; or (as others say), 
They are Shu, strengthener of the two lands in (129) 
Suten-henen (Heracleopolis Magna). The saffron cakes 
are the Kye of Horus; and Tanenet (130) is the burial- 
place of Osiris. Tem hath built thy house, and the 
double Lion-god hath founded thy habitation; (131) 
lo! drugs are brought, and Horus purifieth and Set 
strengtheneth, and Set purifieth and Horus strength- 
eneth. (182) 

“The Osiris, the scribe Ani, victorious before Osiris, 
“hath come into the land, and he hath taken possession 
“thereof with his two feet. He is Tem, and he is in 
“thy city.” 


! A chamber where tortures are inflicted on the enemies of Ra, 


110 REHU AND UATCHIT [Chap. xvii. 133 


(133) “Turn thou back, O Rehu, whose mouth 
“shineth, whose head moveth, turn thou back from 
‘before his strength,” or (as others say), “Turn thou 


Temu in his boat. Rehu and Uatchit. 


“back from him who keepeth (134) watch and is un- 
“seen.” The Osiris Ani is safely guarded. He is 
“Tsis, and he is found (135) with [her] hair spread over 
“him, I shake it out over his brow. He was conceived 
‘in Isis and begotten (136) in Nephthys; and they eut 
‘off from him the things which should be cut off.” 
“Fear followeth after thee, terror is upon (137) thine 
“arms. Thou hast been embraced for millions of years 
‘by the arms [of the nations]; mortals go round about 
“thee. Thou smitest down the mediators (158) of thy 
“foes, and thou seizest the arms of the powers of dark- 
“ness, The two sisters (7., Isis and Nephthys) are 
“oiven to thee for thy delight. (139) Thou hast 
“created that which is in Kher-a’ha and that which is 
“in Annu (Heliopolis). Every god feareth thee, for 
“thou art exceeding great and terrible: thou [avengest| 
“every (140) god on the man that curseth him, and thou 
‘“‘shootest out arrows,.... Thou livest according to 


Chap. xvii. 145 ] ISIS AND HER HAIR 1 iO 


“thy will; thou art Uatchit, the Lady of Flame. 
“ Hvil cometh (141) among those who set themselves up 
“against thee.” 

What then is this? 

“Hidden in form, granted of (142) Menhu,” is the 
name of the tomb. ‘ He seeth what is on his hand” is 
the name of Qerau; or (as others say), (143) the name 
of the block. 

Now he whose mouth shineth and whose head 
moveth is the member of Osiris, or (as others say) 
(144) of Ra. “Thou spreadest thy hair and I shake it 
out over his brow” is spoken concerning Isis, who 
hideth in her hair (145) and draweth her hair over her. , 
Uatchit, the Lady of Flames, is the eye of Ra. 


II2 THE SPEECH OF AN-MAUT-F 


CHAPTER XVIIT.—Inrropvection. 
[From the Papyrus of Ani (Brit. Mus. No. 10,470, sheet 12).] 


Vignette : (Upper register): Ani and his wife with hands 

raised in adoration; the priest An-maut-f, who wears a 

leopard’s skin, and has on the right side of his head the lock 

of hair of Heru-pa-khrat (Harpocrates), introducing them to 
: the gods. 


I. Text; The Speech of An-maut-f: (1) “I have 
“come unto you, O great and godlike sovereign rulers 
“who dwell in heaven, and in earth, and (2) in the 
‘underworld, and I have brought unto you Osiris Ani, 
“He hath not sinned against any of the gods. Grant 
‘ye that he may be with you for all time.” 

II. [Anr’s SPEECH] :— 

(1) THE ADORATION OF OSIRIS, THE LORD OF Re- 


ADDRESS TO OSIRIS 1G ths 4 


STAU, AND OF THE GREAT COMPANY OF THE GODS 
WHO DWELL IN THE UNDERWORLD, BY OSIRIS THE 
SCRIBE ANI (2) who saith :— 

“Homage to thee, O thou ruler of Amentet, Un- 
“nefer in Abtu (Abydos)! Ihave come unto thee, and 
“my heart holdeth right and truth. There is no (3) 
“sin in my body; nor have [I lied wittingly, nor have 


“T done aught with a false heart. Grant thou to me 
“food in the tomb, (4) and that I may come forth into 
“{thy] presence at the altar of the lords of right and 
“truth, and that I may enter into and come forth from 
“the underworld, and that my soul be not turned back, 
“and that I may behold the face of the Sun, and that I 
“may behold the (5) Moon for ever and for ever.” 


VOL, 1 1 


II4 THE SPEECH OF SA-MER-F 


raised in adoration; the priest Sa-mer-f, who wears a leopard’s 
skin, and has on the right side of his head the lock of hair of 
Heru-pa-khrat (Harpocrates), introducing them to the gods. 


III. Text: (1) The Speech of Sa-mer-f:—‘“TI have 
“come unto you, O sovereign princes who dwell in 
‘“ Re-stau, and I have brought unto you Osiris (2) Ani. 
“Grant ye [to him], as to the followers of Horus, cakes, 
‘Cand water, and air, and a homestead in Sekhet-hetep.” 

[Ani’s SPEECH | :— 

IV. (1) THe ApoRATION OF OSIRIS, LORD OF EVER- 
LASTINGNESS, AND OF THE SOVEREIGN PRINCES, THE 
LORDS OF RE-STAU, BY Osiris [THE SCRIBE ANT], (2) 
who saith :— 


‘Homage to thee, O king of the underworld, thou 
“governor of Akert, I have come unto thee. I know 
“thy ways, (3) and I am furnished with the forms 
‘which thou takest in the underworld. Grant thou to 
‘‘me a place in the underworld near unto the lords of 
‘“(4) right and truth. May my homestead be abiding 
‘in Sekhet-hetep, and may I receive cakes in thy 
‘“ presence.” 


CHAPTER OF THE GODS OF LOCALITIES ET 


CHAPTER XVIII. 


[From the Papyrus of Nebseni (Brit. Mus. No. 9,900, sheet 15) ; 
and from the Papyrus of Ani (Brit. Mus. No. 10,470, sheets 
13—14).] 


Vignettes : A pylon surmounted by feathers typical of Maat 
and by uraei wearing disks, and a pylon surmounted by Anpu 
(Anubis) or Ap-uat and by an Utchat. 


Text: (1) “Hail, Thoth, who madest Osiris 
“victorious (2) over his enemies, make thou the scribe 
““Nebseni to be victorious over his enemies, as thou 
“didst make Osiris victorious over his enemies in 


116 


THE GODS OF ANNU 


“the presence of the (3) sovereign 
“princes who are with Ra and Osiris 
“in Annu (Heliopolis), on the night of 
“the ‘things of the night,’ and on the 
“night of the battle, (4) and on the 
“night of the shackling of the Sebaw 
“fiends, and on the day of the destruc- 
“tion of Neb-er-tcher.” ! 

A. Vignette: The gods Tem, Shu, Tef- 

nut, Osiris, and Thoth. 

Text: (1) The great sovereign 
princes in Annu are Tem, Shu, Tef- 
nut [Osiris, and Thoth], (2), and the 
‘shackling of the Sebaw fiends’ signi- 
fieth the destruction of the fiends of 
Set when a second time (3) he worketh 
evil. 

“Hail, Thoth, who madest Osiris 
“victorious over his enemies, make 
“thou the Osiris (4) Ani to be vic- 
“torlous over his enemies in the 
“presence of the great and sovereign 
“princes who are in Tattu, on the 
“night of making the Tet to stand up 
“ine att: 


1 T.e., the day of the mutilation of Osiris. 
* In the ceremony which took place annually 


at Mendes, a Tet it was ‘set up” with great 


reverence in memory of the resurrection of the 
body of Osiris. 


THE GODS OF TATTU 


B. Vignette : The gods Osiris, Isis, Neph- 
thys, and Horus. 

Text: (1) The great sovereign 
princes in Tattu are Osiris, Isis, 
Nephthys, and Heru-netch -hra-tef.' 
Now the [night of] of making the Tet 
to stand up (2) in Tattu signifieth [the 
lifting up of] the arm and shoulder of 
Horus who dwelleth in Sekhem (Leto- 
polis); and these gods stand behind 
Osiris [to protect him] even as do the 
swathings which clothe him (3). 

“Hail, Thoth, who madest Osiris 
“victorious over his enemies, make 
“thou Osiris Ani triumphant over his 
“enemies in the presence of (4) the 
“sovereign princes who are in Sek- 
“hem (Letopolis), on the night of the 
“things of the night [festival] in 
“ ¢ Sekhem,’ ” 


C. Vignette : The gods Osiris and Horus, 
the two Utchats upon pylons, and the god 
Thoth. 

Text: (1) The great sovereign 
princes who are in Sekhem are Heru- 
khenti-an-maati,? and Thoth who is 


1 T.e., ‘‘ Horus, the avenger of his father.” 
2 T.e., ‘* Horus dwelling without eyes.” 


117 


118 


THE GODS OF SEKHEM, PET, AND TEPT 


with the sovereign princes in Narerut-f ! 
(2). Now the night of the “things of 
the night [festival] in Sekhem” signi- 
fieth the light of the rising sun on the 
coffin of Osiris. 

“Hail, Thoth, who madest Osiris 
“ victorious (3) over his enemies, make 
“thou the Osiris Ani triumphant over 
‘his enemies in the presence of the 
“oreat sovereign princes who are in 
“Pet and in Tept,? on the (4) night of 
“setting up the columns of Horus, and 
‘of making him to be established as 
“heir of the things which belonged to 
“his father Osiris.” 


D. Vignette: The gods Horus, Isis, Mes- 
tha, and Hapi. 

Text: (1) The great sovereign 
princes who are in Pet and Tept are 
Horus, Isis, Mestha, and Hapi. Now 
“setting up the columns of (2) Horus ” 
signifieth the command given by Set 
unto his followers: “Set up columns 
“upon it.” 

“Hail, Thoth, who madest Osiris 

1 T.e., An-rut-f. 

2 Pet and Tept were the two halves of the 


city Per-Uatchet, or the metropolis of the 
X1Xth nome of Lower Egypt. 


( 


THE GODS OF THE REKHTI LANDS IIg 


“ vietorious over (3) his enemies, make 
“thou the Osiris Ani, triumphant in 
“peace, victorious over his enemies in 
“the presence of the great sovereign 
“princes who are in the lands of 
“Rekhti, (?) on the (4) night when 
“Tsis lay down to keep watch in order 
“to make lamentation for her brother 
“ Osiris.” 


EH. Vignette: The gods Isis, Horus,! Anpu 
(Anubis), Mestha, and Thoth. 

Text: (1) The great sovereign 
princes who are in the lands of 
Rekhti (?) are Horus, Isis [Anubis], 
Mestha [and Thoth]. 

“Hail, Thoth, who madest Osiris 
‘‘ victorious (2) over his enemies, make 
“thou Osiris, the scribe Ani, trium- 
‘“phant in peace, to be victorious over 
‘his enemies in the presence of the 
‘‘oreat sovereign princes (3) who are in 
“ Abtu (Abydos), on the night of the 
“ood Haker, at the separation of the 
“wicked dead, at the judgment (4) of 
“the Khus, and at the rising up of joy 
“in Teni (This).” 


1 The artist has actually given a figure of 
Osiris. 


THE GODS OF ABTU 


F, Vignette : The gods Osiris, Isis, and 
Ap-uat, and the Tet. 

Text: (1) The great sovereign 
princes who are in Abtu are Osiris, 
Isis, and Ap-uat. 

“Hail, Thoth, who madest Osiris 
“victorious (2) over his enemies, make 
“thou Osiris Ani, the scribe and teller 
‘of the sacred offerings of all the gods, 
‘“(3) to be victorious over his enemies 
“in the presence of the sovereign 
“princes who judge the dead, on the 
“night (4) of the carrying out of the 
‘sentence upon those who are to die.” 


G. Vignette: The gods Thoth, Osiris, 
Anpu (Anubis), and Astennu.! 


Text: (1) The great sovereign 
princes in the judgment of the dead 
are Thoth, Osiris, Anubis, and Asten- 
nu. (2) Now the “carrying out of the 
sentence upon those who are to die” is 
the withholding of that which is so 
needful to the souls of the children of 
impotent revolt. 

“ Hail, (8) Thoth who madest Osiris 
“victorious over his enemies, make 


1 A form of the god Thoth. 


THE GODS OF THE JUDGMENT I2I 


“thou Osiris, the scribe Ani, to be 
“victorious over his enemies in the 
“presence of the great (4) sovereign 
“princes, on the festival of the break- 
“ing and turning up of the earth in 
“Tattu, on the night of the breaking 
“and turning up of the earth in their 
“blood, and of making Osiris to be 
“victorious over his enemies.” 


H. Vignette: The three gods of the 
festival of breaking up the earth in Tattu. 

Text: (1) When the fiends of Set 
come and change themselves into 
beasts, the great sovereign princes, on 
the festival of the breaking and turning 
up of the earth in Tattu, (2) slay them 
in the presence of the gods therein, and 
their blood floweth among them as they 
are smitten down. (3) These things 
are allowed to be done by them by the 
judgment of those who are in Tattu. 

“ Hail, Thoth, who madest Osiris to 
“triumph over his enemies, make thou 
“the Osiris Ani (4) to be victorious 
“over his enemies in the presence of 
“the great sovereign princes who are 
‘in Na-arerut-f,' on the night of him 


1 Te,, An-rut-f. 


THE GODS OF AN-RUT-F 


1H 
No 
iS) 


““who concealeth him- 
“self in divers forms, 
“even Osiris.” 


I. Vignette: The gods 
Ra, Osiris, Shu, and Bebi, 
who is dog-headed. 

Text : (1) The great 
sovereign princes who 
are in Na-arerut-f are 
Ra, Osiris, Shu, and 
Bebi. Now the “night 
of him who (2) con- 
cealeth himself in 


divers forms, even 
Osiris,” is when the 
thigh, [and the head] 
and the heel, and the 
leg, are brought nigh 
unto the coffin of 
Osiris Un-nefer. 

“ Hail, Thoth, who 
‘“madest Osiris (3) to 


“triumph over his 


? 


“enemies, make thou 
“QOsiris Ani to be 
‘“vietorious over his 


K 
“enemies in the pre- 
“sence of the great 
“sovereign princes in 


THE GODS OF RE-STAU I23 


iL. (4) Re-stau, on the 
, “night when Anubis 
“Jay with his arms 
Avs “and his hands over 
“the things behind 
“QOsiris, and when 
‘Horus was made to 


“triumph over his 
‘* enemies,” 


J. Vignette: The gods 
Horus, Osiris, Isis, and 

Text : (1) The great 
sovereign princes in 
Re-stau are Horus, 
Osiris, and Isis. The 
heart of Osiris re- 
joiceth, and the heart 
of (2) Horus; and 
therefore are the 
northern and southern 
parts of heaven at 


peace. 
‘“‘ Hail, Thoth, who 


1 The artist seems to 
have painted one god too 
many, and the third deity 
has not the usual form 
of Isis. 


I24 THE CROWN OF VICTORY (Chap, xix. 


‘“‘madest Osiris victorious over his enemies, make thou 
(3) Osiris Ani, the scribe and teller of the divine 
‘offerings of all the gods, to triumph over his enemies 
‘in the presence of the ten companies of great (4) 
“sovereign princes who are with Ra, and with Osiris, 
“and with every god and goddess in the presence of Neb- 
‘“er-tcher. He hath destroyed his enemies, and (5) he 
“hath destroyed every evil thing belonging unto him.” 


RUBRIC: This chapter being recited, the deceased shall 
come forth by day, purified after death, (6) and [he shall make 
all] the transformations which his heart shall dictate. Now, 
if this chapter be recited over him, he shall come forth upon 
earth, he shall escape from every fire; and none of the foul 
things which appertain unto him shall encompass him for 
eternity or for ever and ever. 


CHAPTER XIX, 
[From Lepsius, Todtenbuch, Bl. 13. ] 
Vignette: This Chapter is without a vignette. 


Text: THe CHAPTER OF THE CHAPLET OF VICTORY. 
(1) Osiris, Auf-ankh, victorious, born of Sheret-Amsu, 
victorious, saith :— 

“Thy father Tem hath woven for thee a beautiful 
‘‘chaplet of victory [to be placed] on [thy] living brow, 
“O thou who lovest the gods, (2) and thou shalt live 


Chap. xix.7] HORUS ON THE THRONE OF RA 125 
“for ever. Osiris-khent-Amentet! hath made thee to 
“triumph over thine enemies, and thy father Seb hath 
“ decreed for thee all his inheritance. Come, therefore, 
‘CQ Horus, son of Isis, for thou, O son of Osiris, sittest 
“upon the throne of thy (3) father Ra to overthrow 
“thine enemies, for he hath ordained for thee the two 
“lands to their utmost limits. Atem? hath [also] 
“ordained this, and the company of the gods hath 
“confirmed the splendid power of the victory of Horus 
“the son of Isis and the son of Osiris for ever and (4) 
“for ever. And Osiris Auf-ankh shall be victorious 
“for ever andever. O Osiris-khent-Amentet, the whole 
“of the northern and southern parts of the heavens, 
“and every god and every goddess, who are in heaven 
“and who are upon earth [will] the victory of Horus, 
‘“‘the son of Isis and the son of Osiris, over his enemies 
“in the presence of (5) Osiris-khent-Amentet who will 
“make Osiris Auf-ankh, victorious, to triumph over his 
‘enemies in the presence of Osiris-khent-Amentet, Un- 
“nefer, the son of Nut, on the day of making him to 
“triumph over Set and his fiends (6) in the presence of 
“the great sovereign chiefs who are in Annu (Helio- 
polis); on the night of the battle and overthrow of 
“the Seba-fiend in the presence of the great sovereign 
“princes who are in Abtu; on the night of making 
“Osiris to triumph over his enemies (7) make thou 
“Osiris Auf-inkh, victorious, to triumph over his 


! T.e., * Osiris, Governor of Amentet.” 
2 I.e., Tem or Temu, the Night Sun. 


126 THE PLOUGHING OF THE EARTH (Chap. xix.8 


“enemies in the presence of the great sovereign princes, 
“who are in the horizon of Amentet; on the day of the 
“festival of Haker in the presence of the great sovereign 
‘princes who are in Tattu; on the night (8) of the 
“setting up of the Tet in Tattu in the presence of the 
‘“‘oreat sovereign princes who are in the ways of the 
“damned ; on the night of the judgment of those who 
“shall be annihilated in the presence of the great 
‘sovereign princes who are in Sekhem (Letopolis) ; (9) 
“on the night of the ‘things of the altars in Sekhem’ 
“in the presence of the great sovereign princes who are 
“in Pet and Tept; on the night of the stablishing of 
“the inheriting by Horus of the things of his father 
“ Osiris in the presence of the great sovereign princes 
“(10) who are at the great festival of the ploughing 
‘and turning up of the earth in Tattu, or (as others 
say), [in] Abtu; on the night of the weighing of 
“words,” or (as others say), “ weighing of locks in the 
“presence of the great sovereign princes who are in 
‘‘An-rut-f on its place; on the night when Horus 
“receiveth the birth-chamber of the gods (11) in the 
‘‘presence of the great sovereign princes who are in the 
“lands of Rekhti; on the night when Isis lieth down 
“to watch [and] to make lamentation for her brother in 
‘the presence of the great sovereign princes who are in 
“ Re-stau ; on the night of making Osiris to triumph 
‘over all his enemies ” (12). 

‘Horus repeated [these] words four times, and all his 
‘enemies fell headlong and were overthrown and were 


Chap. xix. 14] THE TRIUMPH OF HORUS I27 


“eut to pieces; and Osiris Auf-ankh, triumphant, 
“repeated [these] words four times, therefore let all his 
“enemies fall headlong, and be (13) overthrown and cut 
“to pieces. Horus the son of Isis and son of Osiris 
“celebrated in turn millions of festivals, and all his 
“enemies fell headlong, and were overthrown and cut 
“to pieces. Their habitation hath gone forth to the 
“block of the East, their heads have been cut off; (14) 
“their necks have been destroyed; their thighs have 
“been cut off; they have been given over to the Great 
“Destroyer who dwelleth in the valley of the grave ; 
“and they shall never come forth from under the 
“restraint of the god Seb.” 


RUBRIC: This chapter shall be recited over the divine 
chaplet (15) which is laid upon the face of the deceased, and 
thou shalt cast incense into the fire on behalf of Osiris Auf- 
ankh, triumphant, born of Sheret-amsu, triumphant; thus 
shalt thou cause him to triumph over his enemies, (16) dead or 
alive, and he shall be among the followers of Osiris; and a 
hand shall be stretched out to him with meat and drink in the 
presence of the god. \[This chapter] shall be said by thee 
twice at dawn—now it is a never-failing charm—regularly 
and continually. 


128 THE TRIUMPH OF OSIRIS [Chap. xx. 1 


CHAPTER XxX. 
[From the Papyrus of Nebseni (Brit. Mus. No. 9,900, sheet 12). ] 


Vignette: This Chapter, in the Theban Version, has neither 
vignette nor title. 


Text: (1) “Hail, Thoth, who didst make Osiris (2) 
“to triumph over his enemies, snare thou the enemies 
“of Osiris, the scribe Nebseni, the lord of piety, in the 
“presence of the great sovereign princes of every god 
“and goddess; (3) in the presence of the great 
“sovereign princes who are in Annu (Heliopolis) on 
“the night of the battle and of the overthrow of the 
‘Sebau-fiend in Tattu; on (4) the night of making to 
“stand up the double Tet in Sekhem (Letopolis) ; on 
“the night of the things of the night in Sekhem, in Pet, 
“(5) and in Tepu;! on the night of the stablishing of 
“Horus in the heritage of the things of his father in 
“the double land of Rekhti; (6) on the night when 
“Tsis maketh lamentation at the side of her brother 
“Osiris in Abtu (Abydos); on the night of the Haker 
“festival (7) of the distinguishing [between] the dead 
“(i.e,, the damned) and the Spirits on the path of the 
‘dead (i.e., the damned) ; on the night of the judgment 
‘of those who are to be annihilated at the great [festival 


1 Pet and Tepu were the two halves of the city Per-Uatchet, or 
the metropolis of the XIXth nome of Lower Egypt. 


Chap. xx. 10] THE CHAPLET OF VICTORY I29 


“of ] the ploughing and the turning up of the earth (8) 
“oreat in Naarerut-f in Re-stau; and on the night of 
“making Horus to triumph over hisenemies. Horus is 
“mighty, the northern and southern halves of heaven 
“rejoice, (9) Osiris is content thereat and his heart is 
“olad. Hail, Thoth, make thou to triumph Osiris, the 
‘scribe Nebseni, over his enemies (10) in the presence 
“of the sovereign princes of every god and every goddess, 
“and in the presence of you, ye sovereign princes who 
“passed judgment on Osiris behind the shrine.” 

In the Saite Recension this Chapter has no vignette, 
but it has the title, “Another Chapter of the Chaplet 
‘of victory,’ and is arranged in tabular form, The 
words “Hail, Thoth, make Osiris Auf-ankh, trium- 
“phant, to triumph over his enemies even as thou 
“ didst make Osiris to triumph over his enemies,” which 
are written in two horizontal lines, are to be repeated 
before each column of text.. The “great sovereign 
princes” invoked are those of :—(1) Annu (Heliopolis), 
(2) Tattu, (8) Sekhem (Letopolis), (4) Pe and Tep, 
(5) An-arut-f, (6) the double land of Rekhti, (7) Re- 
stau, (8) Abtu, (9) the Paths of the Dead, (10) the 
Ploughing festival in Tattu, (11) Kher-aha, (12) Osiris, 
(13) heaven and earth, (14) every god and every god- 
dess. The rubric reads :— 


If this chapter be recited regularly and always by a man who 
hath purified himself in water of natron, he shall come forth 
by day after he hath come into port (i.e., is dead), and he shall 
perform all the transformations which his heart shall dictate, 
and he shall come forth from the fire. 


WVOL-eLs K 


130 THE GIVING OF A MOUTH TO THE DECEASED 


CHAPTER XXI. 
[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 9). ] 


In the Papyrus of Ani the XXIst Chapter follows 
the XXIInd, but it is there given without title and 
without vignette; in the Turin papyrus published by 
Lepsius (J'odtenbuch, Bl. 14) the XXIst and XXIInd 
Chapters are quite distinct, and each has its own title, 
while a single vignette stands over both. 


Vignette: The deceased standing in the presence of a 
beatified person, who holds the symbol of life in one hand, 
and a staff in the other. A priest is holding in his right hand 
the UR-HEKAU instrument, and is about to touch the mouth of 
the deceased; in his left hand he holds a vase of ointment. 
(From Lepsius, Zodtenbuch, Bl. 14.) The ur-HEKAU instrument, 
w¢., “the Mighty one of Enchantments,” was made in the form 
of a ram-headed serpent, and it was believed to possess magical 
powers. 


Text: (1) Tue CHApreR OF GIVING A MOUTH TO 
THE OVERSEER OF THE HOUSE OF THE OVERSEER OF 


xxi] THE GIVING OF A MOUTH TO THE DECEASED I3I 


THE SEAL, NU, TRIUMPHANT, (2) IN THE UNDERWORLD. 
He saith :— 


“Homage to thee, O thou lord of brightness, thou 
“who art at the head of the Great House, prince of the 
“night and of thick darkness! I have come unto thee 
“being a pure (3) khu. Thy two hands are behind 
“thee, and thou hast thy lot with [thy] ancestors. O 
“orant thou unto me my mouth that I may speak 
“therewith; and guide thou to me my heart at the 
“season when there is (4) cloud and darkness.” 


CHAPTER XXII. 


[From the Papyrus of Ani (Brit, Mus. No. 10,470, sheet 6). ] 


From the Papyrus of Nebseni, 


Vignette: In the Papyrus of Nebseni (sheet 5), the “Guardian 

of the Balance” is seen with his right hand stretched out to 

touch the mouth of the deceased who stands before him, In 

other papyri the deceased himself is seen standing with either 

his right or his left hand raised to his mouth, as if to perform 
the ceremony of “ opening the mouth” for himself. 


‘ 


I32 THE GIVING OF A MOUTH TO THE DECEASED [axii. 


Text: (1) THe CHapreR OF GIVING A MouUTH (2) 
To Osrris ANI, THE SCRIBE AND TELLER OF THE 
HOLY OFFERINGS OF ALL THE GODS, VICTORIOUS, IN 
THE UNDERWORLD. He saith :— 


“T rise (3) out of the egg in the hidden land. May 
‘my mouth be given (4) unto me that I may speak 
“therewith in the presence of the great god, the lord of 
“the (5) Tuat (underworld). May my hand and my 
‘arm not be forced back in the presence of the sovereign 
“princes of any god. I am Osiris, the lord of Re-stau, 
(6); may I, Osiris the scribe Ani, victorious, have a 
“portion with him who is (7) on the top of the Steps 
“(i.e., Osiris). According to the desire of my heart, I 
“have come from the Pool of Fire, and I have quenched 
“the fire,” 


CHAPTER XXIII. 


[From the Papyrus of Ani (Brit. Mus. No. 10,470, sheet 15).] 


From the Papyrus of Ani, ; From the Turin Papyrus. 


xxiii, 1-4] OPENING THE MOUTH OF THE DECEASED 133 


Vignette: The statue of Ani, the scribe, seated upon a 
pedestal in the form of the emblem of Madt (i.e, right and 
truth). Before it stands the Sem priest clad in a panther’s 
skin and holding in his right hand the ram-headed, serpent-like 
instrument “ Ur-hekau,” with which he is about to touch the lips 
of the statue and so perform the ceremony of “ Opening the 
Mouth.” At his feet are a sepulchral box for holding unguents, 
&c.; three instruments called respectively “Seb-ur,” “Tun-tet,” 
and “Temanu”; and the object called “ Pesh-en-kef.” In the 
Papyrus of Nebseni the scene is described as “the Sem priest 
performing {the ceremony] of the ‘Opening of the Mouth’” 
(sheet 5). In the Saite Recension a priest is seen offering a 
vase of ointment only to the deceased. 


Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF OPENING THE MOUTH 
oF Ostris. THE SCRIBE ANI, TRIUMPHANT, saith :— 


“May the god Ptah open my mouth, and may the god 
“of my city loose the swathings, even the swathings 
“which are over my mouth. (2) Moreover, may Thoth,' 
“being filled and furnished with charms, come and loose 
“the bandages, even the bandages of Set? which fetter 
“my mouth (3); and may the god Tem hurl them at 
“those who would fetter [me] with them, and drive 
“them back. May my mouth be opened, may my mouth 
“be unclosed by Shu® (4) with his iron knife wherewith 
“he opened the mouth of the gods. I am the goddess 

1 The allusion here is to the belief that Thoth was the great 
master of the use of magical names and formulae. He gave the 
word which resulted in the creation of the world; he supplied Isis 
with words of magical power which enabled her to effect the 


resurrection of Osiris, and also of her son Horus after he had been 
stung to death by a scorpion. 

* The great antagonist of Horus, and god both of darkness and 
of dark deeds. 

3 Some texts call the god Ptah. 


134 THE GIVING OF WORDS OF POWER [Chap. xxiii. 5 


““Sekhet,! and I sit upon [my] place in the great (5) 
“wind (?) of heaven. Iam the great goddess Sah who 
“dwelleth among the Souls of Annu (Heliopolis)2 
‘Now as concerning every charm and all the words 
“which may be spoken against me, (6) may the gods 
“resist them, and may each and every one of the 
“company of the gods withstand them,” 


CHAPTER XXIV. 


[From the Papyrus of Ani (Brit. Mus, No. 10,470, sheet 15). ] 


Vignette: This Chapter has no vignette in the Theban 
papyri. The above vignette is from the Turin Papyrus, and 
represents a priest addressing the deceased. 


Text: (1) THE CHAPTER OF BRINGING CHARMS UNTO 
Ostris ANI [IN THE UNDERWORLD]; he saith :—(2) 


‘“T am Tem-Khepera, who brought himself into being 
“upon the thigh of his divine mother, Those who are 


1 The goddess of the heat of the sun as a power of destruction. 


* The Souls of Annu are Ra, Shu, and Tefnut; see the vignette 
to Chapter CXYV. 


Chap. xxiv.7] THE GIVING OF WORDS OF POWER 135 


“in Nu (7.e., the sky) are made wolves, (3) and those 
“who are among the sovereign princes are become 
‘hyenas. Behold, I gather together the charm [from 
“every place where] it is, and from every man with 
“whom it is, swifter than greyhounds and quicker than 
“light. (4) Hail, thou who towest along the Makhent 
“boat of Ra, the stays of thy sails and of thy rudder are 
“taut in the wind as thou sailest up the Pool of Fire in 
“the underworld. Behold, thou gatherest together the 
“charm (5) from every place where it is, and from every 
“man with whom it is, swifter than greyhounds and 
“quicker than light, [the charm] which created the 
“forms of being from the .... (6) mother, and which 
“either createth the gods or maketh them to be silent, 
“and which giveth the heat of fire unto the gods. 
“ Behold, the charm is given unto me, from wherever it 
“is [and from him with whom it is], (7) swifter than 
“oreyhounds and quicker than light,” or (as others say), 
“ quicker than a shadow.” 


136 THE GIVING OF MEMORY TO THE DECEASED 


CHAPTER XXYV. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 5). ] 


Vignette : In the greater number of the Theban papyri this 
Chapter is without vignette. In the Brocklehurst papyrus, 
however (see Naville, Todtenbuch, Bd. I. Bl. 36), the Sem priest, 
wearing a panther’s skin, is seen holding up before the face of 
the deceased, who stands before him, a small bearded figure 
like an ushadti. In the Turin papyrus (Lepsius, Todtenbuch, 
Bl. 15), the priest and the deceased are standing facing each 
other, and no ceremony is being performed. 


Text: (1) THE CHAPTER OF MAKING A MAN TO 
POSSESS MEMORY IN THE UNDERWORLD. The overseer of 
the house of the overseer of the seal, Nu, triumphant, 
the son of the overseer of the house of the overseer of 
the seal, Amen-hetep, saith :— 

(2) “May my name be given to me in the Great 
‘House, and may I remember my name in the House of 
“Fire on the night (3) of counting the years and of 
“telling the number of the months. I am with the 
‘Divine One, [and I sit on the eastern side of heaven]. 
“Tf any god whatsoever should advance unto me (4), 
“Jet me be able to proclaim his name forthwith.” 


THE GIVING OF A HEART TO THE DECEASED 137 


CHAPTER XXVI. 


[From the Papyrus of Ani (Brit. Mus. No. 10,470, sheet 15). ] 


From the Papyrus of Ani. 


Vignette: The scribe Ani, clothed in white, and with his 
heart in his right hand, addressing the god Anpu (Anubis), 
jackal-headed. In his left hand, which is outstretched, Ani 
holds a necklace of several rows of coloured beads; the clasp is 
made in the form of a pylon or gateway, and on the side of the 
pendant, which is in the same form, is a representation of a 
scarab or beetle in a boat to typify the Sun-god Ra-Khepera 
in his boat. From the pendant hang lotus flowers. In other 
Theban papyri the vignettes are different. In the Papyrus of 
Nebseni (sheet 5) the god “ Anubis who dwelleth in the city of 
embalmment” gives a heart to the deceased; and in others (see 
Naville, Todtenbuch, Bd. I. Bl. 37) the deceased is seen either 
being embraced by Anubis or addressing his heart which rests 
upon a standard before him. In the Turin papyrus (Lepsius, 
Todtenbuch, Bl. 15) the deceased is seen kneeling before his 
own soul, which is in the form of a human-headed hawk, and 
clasping his heart to his breast with his left hand, 


138 THE GIVING OF A HEART TO THE DECEASED [xxvi. 1 


SM Tm les, 
P T= 


From the Papyrus of Nebseni. From the Turin Papyrus, 


Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF GIVING A HEART TO 
Osiris (2) IN THE UNDERWORLD. He saith :— 


““May my heart (ib)! be with me in the House of 
“Hearts! May my heart (Adt) be with me in the 
“House of Hearts! May my heart be with me, and 
“may it rest there, [or] I shall not eat of the cakes of 
“Osiris on the eastern side of the Lake (3) of Flowers, 
“neither shall I have a boat wherein to go down the 
‘Nile, nor another wherein to go up, nor shall I be able 
“to sail down the Nile with thee. May my mouth [be 
‘‘oiven| to me that I may (4) speak therewith, and my 
“two legs to walk therewith, and my two hands and 
‘arms to overthrow my foe. May the doors of heaven 
‘be opened unto me (5); may Seb, the Prince * of the 
‘““oods, open wide his two jaws unto me; may he open 
“my two eyes which are blindfolded; may he cause me 
“to stretch apart (6) my two legs which are bound 
“together; and may Anpu (Anubis) make my thighs 

1 Ab is undoubtedly the “heart,” and hdt is the region wherein 
is the heart; the word may be fairly well rendered by ‘‘ breast,” 


though the pericardium is probably intended. 
2 Erpdt, i.e., ‘hereditary tribal chief.” 


xxvi.9| THE GIVING OF A HEART TO THE DECEASED 139 


“firm so that I may stand uponthem. May the goddess 
‘““Sekhet make me to rise (7) so that I may ascend unto 
“heaven, and that that may be done which I command 
“in the House of the ka (double) of Ptah (i.e, Mem- 
“phis). I understand with my heart. I have gained 
“the mastery over my (8) heart, I have gained the 
“mastery over my two hands, I have gained the 
“mastery over my legs, I have gained the power to 
‘do whatsoever my ka (double) pleaseth. (9) My soul 
“shall not be fettered to my body at the gates of the 
“underworld; but I shall enter in peace and I shall 
“come forth in peace.” 


CHAPTER XXVII. 


[From the Papyrus of Ani (Brit. Mus. No, 10,470, sheets 15 and 16). ] 


Vignette: The scribe Ani, with hands raised in adoration, 
and his heart, which is set upon a pedestal, in the presence of 
four gods who are seated upon a pedestal in the form of the 


I40 OF GUARDING THE HEART { Chap, xxvii. 1 


emblem of Madt. In the Turin Papyrus (Lepsius, Todtenbuch, 
Bl, 15) the deceased is shown kneeling before the four children 
of Horus. 


Text: (1) THe CHAPYER OF NOT LETTING THE 
HEART (HATI) OF A MAN BE TAKEN FROM HIM IN THE 
UNDERWORLD.! Saith Osiris Ani :— 


“ Hail, ye who carry away hearts! | Hail], ye who steal 
“and crush hearts, and who make [the heart of a man to 
“oo through its transformations according to his deeds, 
“Jet not what he hath done harm him before you].? (2) 
“Homage to you, O ye lords of eternity, ye possessors 
“ of everlastingness, take ye not this heart of Osiris Ani 
“into (3) your grasp, this heart of Osiris, and cause ye 
“not words of evil to spring up against it; because this 
“is the heart of (4) Osiris Ani, victorious, and it be- 
“longeth unto him of many names (i.e., Thoth), the 
“mighty one whose words are his limbs, and who 
“sendeth forth his heart to dwell (5) in his body. The 


1 The Papyrus of Mes-em-neter (Naville, Todtenbuch, Bd. II. 
p. 92) adds :—‘‘ His heart goeth forth to take up its abode in his 
body, his heart is renewed before the gods, and he hath gained the 
mastery over it.” 

2 The words within brackets are from the Papyrus of Mes-em- 
neter. 


o 


Chap, xxvii. 6] OF GUARDING THE HEART I4f 


“heart of Osiris Ani is victorious, it is made new 
“before the gods, he hath gained power over it, he hath 
“not been spoken to [according to] what he hath done. 
“He hath gotten power over (6) his own members. 
“His heart obeyeth him, he is the lord thereof, it is in 
“his body; and it shall never fall away therefrom. I, 
“ Osiris, the scribe Ani, victorious in peace, and trium- 
“phant in the beautiful Amenta and on the mountain 
“of eternity, bid thee to be obedient unto me in the 
“underworld.” 


CHAPTER XXVIII. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 5). ] 


Vignette : In some papyri containing the Theban Recension 
of the Book of the Dead (e.., those of Nu and Amen-neb (Brit. 
Mus. No. 9964), this Chapter has no vignette. In the Papyrus 
of Nefer-uben-f the deceased is seen holding his heart upon his 
breast with his left hand, and kneeling before a monster in 
human form who holds a knife in his right hand, and grasps his 


142 OF GUARDING THE HEART [Chap. xxviii. x 


tail with the left. Another papyrus shows the deceased offering 
incense to Osiris, who, standing on a pedestal in the form of 
Maat, holds the flail and sceptre in his hands; in the Brockle- 
hurst- papyrus the deceased is kneeling and holding his heart 
in his left hand, which is outstretched (see Naville, Todtenbuch, 
Bd. I. Bl. 39), In the Turin Papyrus the deceased is adoring 
his heart, which is placed on a pedestal, before a seated deity 
(Lepsius, Todtenbuch, Bl. 15). 


Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF NOT LETTING THE 
HEART OF THE OVERSEER OF THE HOUSE OF THE 
OVERSEER OF THE SEAL, NU, TRIUMPHANT, BE CARRIED 
AWAY (2) FROM HIM IN THE UNDERWORLD. He 
saith :— 

“ Hail, thou Lion-god! Iam the Flower Bush (Unb). 
“That which is an abomination unto me is the divine 
“block. Let not this my heart (Adti) be carried away 
“from me by (3) the fighting gods in Annu. Hail, 
“thou who dost wind bandages round Osiris and who 
“hast seen Set! Hail, thou who returnest after 
‘“‘smiting and destroying him before the mighty ones ! 
“(4) This my heart (ab) [sitteth] and weepeth for itself 
“before Osiris; it hath made supplication for me, I 
“have given unto him and I have decreed unto him the 
“thoughts (5) of the heart in the House of the god 
“Usekh-hra! and I have brought to him sand (sie) at 
“the entry to Khemennu (Hermopolis Magna). Let 
‘not this my heart (Adti) be carried away from me! I 
‘make thee to (6) dwell (?) upon his throne, O thou who 
“joinest together hearts (hdtw) [in Sekhet-hetep (with) 


1 J.e., the god of the ‘* Large Face.” 


Chap. xxviii. 9] OF GUARDING THE HEART 143 


years] of strength against all things that are an 
“abomination unto thee, and to carry off (7) food from 
“among the things which belong unto thee, and are in 
“thy grasp by reason of thy two-fold strength. And 
“this my heart (Adti) is devoted to the decrees of the 
“ood Tem who leadeth me into the (8) dens of Suti, but 
“Jet not this my heart, which hath done its desire 
“before the sovereign princes who are in the under- 
“world, be given unto him. When they find the leg 
“and the swathings (9) they bury them.” 


CHAPTER XxXIXa. 


{From the Papyrus of Ani (Brit. Mus. No. 10,470, sheet 15). ] 


Vignette; Ani standing, with a staff in his hand. In the ° 
Turin Papyrus (Lepsius, Todtenbuch, Bl. 15) this Chapter has 
no vignette, 


I44 OF GUARDING THE HEART (Chap. xxix.A, 1 


Text: (1) THe CHaApTeR OF NOT LETTING THE 
HEART OF A MAN BE TAKEN AWAY FROM HIM IN THE 
UNDERWORLD. Osiris Ani, victorious, saith :— 

“Turn thou back, O messenger of every god! (2) Is 
“it that thou art come [to carry away] this my heart 
“which liveth? But my heart which liveth shall not 
“be given unto thee. (3) [As I] advance, the gods 
“hearken unto my offerings, and they all fall down 
‘upon their faces in their own places.” 


CHAPTER XXIXs. 


[From the Papyrus of Amen-hetep (Naville, Todtenbuch, Bd. I. 
Bl. 40).] 


Vignette : This Chapter has no vignette. 


Text: (1) Tue CHAPTER OF NOT ALLOWING THE 
HEART OF AMEN-HETEP, VICTORIOUS, TO BE CARRIED 
AWAY DEAD IN THE UNDERWORLD. ‘The deceased 
saith :— 

‘‘My heart is with me, (2) and it shall never come to 
“pass that it shall be carried away. I am the lord of 
“hearts, the slayer of the heart. (3) I live in right 
“and truth (Madt) and I have my being therein. I 
“am Horus, the dweller in hearts, (4) who is within 
“the dweller in the body. I live in my word, and my 
“heart hath being. Let not my heart be taken away 
“ (5) from me, let it not be wounded, and may neither 


Chap. xxix,c. ] THE HEART OF CARNELIAN I45 


“wounds nor gashes be dealt upon me because it hath 
“been taken away from me. (6) Let me have my being 
“in the body of [my] father Seb, [and in the body of my] 
“mother Nut. I have not done that which is held in 
“abomination by the gods; let me not suffer defeat 
“there, [but let me be] triumphant.” 


CHAPTER XX1Xco. 


[From the Papyrus of Ani (Brit. Mus. No. 10,470, sheet 33). ] 


VMI | 


Vignette: A heart. 


Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF A HEART OF CARNELIAN. 
Osiris Ani, triumphant, saith :— 

“Tam the Bennu, the soul of Ra, and the guide of 
“the gods (2) in the Tuat (underworld). Their divine 
“souls come forth upon earth to do the will of their 
“kas, let therefore the soul of Osiris Ani come forth to 
“do the will of his ka.” 

VOL. I. L 


146 THE HEART OF TRANSFORMATIONS [Chap. xxx.1 


CHAPTER XXX. 


[From Lepsius, Todtenbuch, Bl. 16. ] 


Dy 


S i 


Vignette: The deceased, with hands raised in adoration, 
standing before a beetle placed on a pedestal. 


Text: THE CHAPTER OF NOT LETTING THE HEART 
OF A MAN BE DRIVEN AWAY FROM HIM IN THE UNDER- 
WORLD. (1) Osiris Auf-ankh, triumphant, born of 
Sheret-Amsu, triumphant, saith :— 

‘My heart, my mother; my heart, my mother! My 
“heart of my existence upon earth. May naught stand 
“up to oppose me in judgment; may there be no 
“opposition to me in the presence of the sovereign 
“ princes; (2) may [no evil] be wrought against me in 
“the presence of the gods; may there be no parting [of 
“thee] from me in the presence of the great god, the 
“Jord of Amentet. Homage to thee, O thou heart of 
“ Osiris-khent-Amentet! Homage to you, O my reins! 
“Homage to you, O ye gods (3) who dwell in the divine 
“clouds, and who are exalted (or holy) by reason of your 


Chap, xxx.a.] THE HEART OF TRANSFORMATIONS 147 


“sceptres! Speak ye fair words for the Osiris Auf- 
“ankh, and make ye him to prosper before Nehebka. 
“And behold, though I be joined unto the (4) earth, 
“and am in the mighty innermost part of heaven, let me 
“remain on the earth and not die in Amentet, and let 
“me be a khw therein for ever and ever.” 

RUBRIC: This [chapter] shall be recited over a basalt 
scarab, which shall be set in a gold setting, and it shall be 
placed inside the heart of the man! for whom the ceremonies 
of “opening the mouth” and of anointing with unguent have 
been performed. And there shall be recited by way of a 


magical charm the words :—‘“ My heart, my mother; my heart, 
my mother! My heart of transformations.” 


CHAPTER XXXa. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 5). ] 


Wy 


Vignette : In many of the papyri containing the Theban 
Recension this Chapter has no vignette; in one, however, the 
vignette is a heart standing above a vase, in another the 


1 Te., the deceased. 


148 OF PROTECTING THE HEART | Chap, xxx.a, 


deceased is seen adoring his heart, and in another the deceased 
is standing before four gods, one of whom is offering a heart to 
him (see Naville, Todtenbuch, Bd. I. Bl. 42). 


Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF NOT LETTING THE 
HEART OF THE OVERSEER OF THE HOUSE OF THE 
OVERSEER OF THE SEAL, NU, TRIUMPHANT, BE DRIVEN 
AWAY FROM HIM IN THE UNDERWORLD. He saith :—(2) 


“OQ my heart, my mother; O my heart, my mother ! 
‘“O my heart of my existence upon earth. May naught 
“stand up to oppose me in judgment in the presence of 
“the lords of the trial (3); let it not be said of me and 
“of that which I have done, ‘He hath done deeds 
“‘aoainst that which is right and true’; may naught 
“be against me in the presence of the great god, the 
“lord of Amentet. Homage to thee, O my heart! (4) 
“ Homage to thee, O my heart! Homage to you, O my 
“reins! Homage to you, O ye gods who dwell in the 
‘divine clouds, and who are (5) exalted (or holy) by 
“reason of your sceptres! Speak ye [for me] fair 
“things to Ra, and make ye me to prosper before 
“Nehebka.!| And behold me, even though I be joined 
“to the earth in the mighty innermost parts thereof, 
“Jet me remain upon the earth and let me not die in 
« Amentet, but become a Khu therein.” 


1 One of the forty-two judges in the Hall of Osiris. 


OF PROTECTING THE HEART I49 


CHAPTER XXXz. 


[From the Papyrus of Ani (Brit. Mus. No. 10,470, sheet 15). ] 


From the Papyrus of Nebseni. 


Vignette : (1) Some papyri containing the Theban Recension 
give this Chapter without any vignette, and it is probable that 
this arises from the fact that it often appears as one of the 
texts which occur in the great Judgment Scene, where it forms 
the prayer put into the mouth of the deceased ; see the Papyrus 
of Ani, sheet 3, and the Papyrus of Hu-nefer, sheet 3. In the 
Papyrus of Nebseni, sheet 4, the deceased kmeels in one pan of 
the Balance, and he is being weighed against his heart which 
rests in the other in the presence of “ Osiris, the great god, the 
Governor of Everlastingness.” The support of the beam is 
surmounted by a human head, and the tongue of the Balance 
is being scrutinized by a dog-headed ape, seated on a pedestal, 
who is called “ Thoth, the lord of the Balance.” Elsewhere 
this ape is seated on a pedestal with steps, and is called “ The 
lord of Khemennu (Hermopolis Magna), the righteous weigher ” 
(see Naville, Todtenbuch, Bd. I. Bl. 43). In the Papyrus of 
Amen-neb (Brit. Mus. No. 9964), the deceased stands by the 
Balance while a figure of himself is being weighed against his 
heart; in this example of the scene the support of the beam is 
surmounted by the head of a jackal. Elsewhere the vignette 


50 OF PROTECTING THE HEART, [iGhapooxas: 


is simply a heart, or a scarab, or the deceased seated adoring 

his heart, or the deceased standing in adoration before a beetle, 

which is the symbol of the god Khepera, the self-created god 

and the type of the Resurrection (see Lepsius, Todtenbuch, 
Bl, 16). 


| Gab 


=s 

Se 

a 
ard 


From the Papyrus of Sutimes. 


Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF NoT (2) LETTING THE 
HEART OF OSIRIS, THE SCRIBE OF THE HOLY OFFER- 
INGS OF ALL THE GODS, ANI, TRIUMPHANT, BE DRIVEN 
FROM HIM IN THE UNDERWORLD. He saith :— 


“My heart, my mother; (3) my heart, my mother! 
‘My heart whereby I came into being! May naught 
“stand up to oppose me at [my] judgment; may there 
“be no opposition to me in the presence of the sovereign 
“princes (J'chatcha) ; may there be no parting of thee 
“from me in the presence of him that keepeth the 
“Balance! Thou art my ka, the dweller in (4) my 
“body; the god Khnemu! who knitteth and strength- 
“eneth my limbs. Mayest thou come forth into the 


! Khnemu was the fellow-worker with Ptah in carrying out the 
mandate for creation which was uttered by Thoth. He is depicted 
at Philae in the act of fashioning a man on a potter's wheel. The 
name Khnemu means ‘‘moulder,” ‘‘ fashioner,” and the like. 


Ch. xxx.B. Rubric] OF PROTECTING THE HEART LAT 


“place of happiness whither we go. May the Shenit 
“(ie., the divine officers of the court of Osiris), who 
“form the conditions of the lives of men, not cause my 
“name to stink. [Let it be satisfactory unto us, and 
“Jet the listening be satisfactory unto us, and let there 
“be joy of heart unto us at the weighing of words. 
“Let not that which is false be uttered against me 
“before the great god, the lord of Amentet. Verily 
“how great shalt thou be when thou risest in 
“triumph !] +” 
RUBRIC. 
i From the Papyrus of Amen-hetep (see Naville, Todtenbuch, Bd. II. 
p. 99). ] 

(1) These words are to be said over a scarab of green stone 
encircled with a band of refined copper and [having] a ring of 
silver, (2) which shall be placed on the neck of the khuw. 

This chapter was found in the city of Khemennu (Hermo- 
polis Magna) under the feet of [the statue of] (3) this god. 
[It was inscribed] upon a slab of iron of the south, in the 
writing of the god himself, in the time of (4) the majesty of the 
king of the north and of the south, (Men-kau-Ra },” triumphant, 
by the royal son Heru-ta-ta-f, who discovered it whilst he was 


on his journey (5) to make an inspection of the temples and of 
their estates. 


In some ancient papyri the text of this chapter is 
made to follow the Rubric of Chapter LXIYV., with 
which it had some close connexion, and in others it 
follows the Rubric of Chapter CXLVIII. The Rubrical 


1 The words within brackets are translated from the Papyrus of - 
Nebseni (sheet 4). 
2 T.e., Mycerinus, a king of the [Vth Dynasty. 


152 OF REPULSING CROCODILES 


direction concerning Chapter LXIV. reads :—“ Behold, 
“make a scarab of green stone, wash it with gold and 
‘place it in the heart of a man (i.e., the deceased), and 
“it will perform for him the ‘opening of the mouth’; 
“anoint it with dutw unguent, and recite over it as a 
“charm the following words :—‘ My heart, my mother ; 
‘““my heart, my mother!’” ete. In the Turin Papyrus 
(Lepsius, T'odtenbuch, Bl. 16) it follows Chapter XXX. 
which contains parts of Chapters XX Xa. and XXXs. 


CHAPTER XXXI. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 5). J 


ee Se 
Vignette: In the Papyrus of Nekht the vignette of this 
_ Chapter represents the deceased attacking three crocodiles, but 
in the Saite Recension he is attacking four (see Lepsius, 


Todtenbuch Bl. 16). 


Chap. xxxi.] OF REPULSING CROCODILES 153 


Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF BEATING BACK THE 
CROCODILE THAT COMETH TO CARRY AWAY THE CHARM 
FROM NU, THE OVERSEER OF THE HOUSE OF THE OVER- 
SEER OF THE SEAL, TRIUMPHANT, THE SON OF THE 
OVERSEER OF THE HOUSE, AMEN-HETEP, TRIUMPHANT, 
IN THE UNDERWORLD. He saith :—(2) 

“Get thee back, return, get thee back, thou crocodile- 
“fiend Sui; thou shalt not advance to me, for I live by 
“reason of the magical words which I have by me. I 
“do not utter that name of thine to the great god (3) 
“who will cause thee to come to the two divine envoys; 
“the name of the one is Betti,! and the name of the 
“other is ‘Hra-k-en-Maat.’? Heaven hath power over 
“its seasons, (4) and the magical word hath power over 
“that which is in its possession, let therefore my mouth 
“have power over the magical word which is therein. 
“My front teeth are like unto flint knives, and my back 
“teeth are like unto the Nome of Tutef.> Hail thou 
“that sittest with thine eyeball upon these my magical 
“words! Thou shalt not carry them away, O thou 
“crocodile that livest by means of magical words !” 


In the Turin Papyrus (Lepsius, op. cit., Bl. 16) the 
following lines are added to this Chapter :— 


“T am the Prince in the field. I, even I, am Osiris, 
“who hath shut in his father Seb together with his 


1 Te, ‘‘He of two teeth” (or two horns) ; the Saite Recension 
(Lepsius, op. cit., Bl. 16) reads Bent, 7.e., ‘* ape.” 

2 I.e., ‘Thy face is of right and truth.” 

§ We should probably add the word fep and read Tep tu-f, ‘‘ He 
that is upon his hill,” t.e., Anubis. 


154 OF REPULSING CROCODILES — [Chap. xxxi. 


“mother Nut (5) on the day of the great slaughter. 
“My father is Seb and my mother is Nut. I am Horus, 
“the first-born of Ra, who is crowned. I am Anpu 
‘“(Anubis) on the day of reckoning. I, even I, am 
“Osiris, (6) the prince who goeth in and declareth the 
“offerings which are written down, I am the guardian 
“of the door of Osiris, even I. I have come, I have 
“become glorious (or a Khu), I have been reckoned up, 
“T am strong, I have come and I avenge mine own self. 
“(7) I have sat in the birth chamber of Osiris, and I 
“was born with him, and I renew my youth along with 
“him. I have laid hold upon the Thigh which was by 
“Osiris, (8) and I have opened the mouth of the gods 
“therewith. I sit upon the place where he sitteth, and 
“T write down the number [of the things] which make 
“strong (?) the heart, thousands of loaves of bread, 
“thousands of vases of beer, which are upon the altars 
“of his father Osiris, [numbers of] jackals, wolves, (9) 
“oxen, red fowl, geese and ducks. Horus hath done 
“away with the sacrifices of Thoth. I fill the office of 
“priest in the regions above, and I write down there 
“Tthe things] which make strong the heart. I make 
“offerings (or offerings are made to me) (10) at the 
“altars of the Prince of Taftu, and I have my being 
‘through the oblations [made to] him, I snuff the 
“wind of the East by his head, and I lay hold 
“upon the breezes of the West thereby, (11)..... I 
“eo round about heaven in the four quarters thereof, 
“I stretch out my hand and grasp the breezes of the 


Chap, xxxii, 5 | OF REPULSING CROCODILES TE 


“south [which] are upon its hair. Grant unto me air 
“among the venerable beings and among those who 
“eat bread.” 


RUBRIC: If this chapter be known by [the deceased] he 
shall come forth by day, he shall rise up to walk upon the 
earth among the living, and he shall never fail and come to an 
end, never, never, never. 


CHAPTER XXXII. 


[From Lepsius, Todtenbuch, Bll. 16 and 17.] 


eS 8 


Y. 


nel: 


S Da =) 


ppp 


Vignette: Four crocodiles advancing against the deceased 
who is spearing one of them. 

Text :' TH CHAPTER OF BEATING BACK THE CROcO- 
DILE THAT COMETH TO CARRY AWAY THE MAGICAL 
WORDS FROM THE KuHU IN THE UNDERWORLD. (1) 
Osiris Auf-ankh, triumphant, saith :— 

“The Mighty One fell down upon the place where he 
“is, or (as others say), upon his belly, but the company 


1 From no Papyrus containing the Theban Recension can a con- 
nected translation of this Chapter be made ; it has, therefore, been 
thought best to give a rendering of it from the text as found in the 
Saite Recension. 


156 OF REPULSING CROCODILES (Chap, xxxii. 2 


“of the gods caught him and set him up again. [My] 
“soul cometh and it speaketh with its father, and the 
“ Mighty One delivereth it (2) from these eight! croco- 
‘“diles. I know them by their names and [what] they 
“live upon, and I am he who hath delivered his father 
“from them.” 

“Get thee back, O Crocodile that dwellest in the 
“West, thou that livest upon the stars which never 
“rest, (3) for that which is an abomination unto thee 
‘‘is in my belly, O thou that hast eaten the forehead of 
“Osiris, I am Set.” 

“Get thee back, O Crocodile that dwelleth in the 
“West, for the serpent-fiend Naau is in my belly, and 
“Twill give him unto thee; let not thy flame be 
“against me.” 

“Get thee back, O (4) Crocodile that dwellest in the 
“Hast, who feedest upon those who eat their own 
“filth, for that which is an abomination unto thee is 
“in my belly; I advance, I am Osiris.” 

“Get thee back, O Crocodile that dwellest in the 
“Hast, the serpent-fiend Naau is in (5) my belly, and I 
“will give [him] unto thee; let not thy flame come 
‘against me.” 

“Get thee back, O Crocodile that dwellest in the 
“South, who feedest upon filth, and waste, and dirt, 
“for that which is an abomination unto thee is in my 
“Delly; shall not the flame be on thy hand? I am 
“Sept.” (6) 


1 The Theban texts mention fowr crocodiles only. 


Chap, xxxii.1o] OF REPULSING CROCODILES 7) 


“Get thee back, O Crocodile that dwellest in the 
“South, for I am safe by reason of my charm ; my fist 
“is among the flowers and I will not give it unto thee.” 

“Get thee back, O Crocodile that dwellest in the 
“North, who feedest upon what is offered (?) within 
“the hours, (7) for that which thou abominatest is in 
“my belly; let [not] thy venom be upon my head, for 
“Tam Tem.” 

“Get thee back, O Crocodile that dwellest in the 
“North, for the goddess Serqet is in my belly and I 
“have not yet brought her forth (8). I am Uatch- 
“Maati (or Merti).” 

“The. things which are created are in the hollow of 
“my hand, and those which have not yet come into 
“being are in my body. I am clothed and wholly 
“provided with thy magical words, O Ra, the which 
“are in heaven above me and in the earth beneath me. 
“(9) I have gained power, and exaltation, and a full- 
“breathing throat in the abode of my father Ur (7.e., 
“the Mighty One), and he hath delivered unto me the 
“beautiful Amentet which destroyeth living men and 
“women; but strong is its divine lord, who suffereth 
“from weakness,” (10) or (as others say) “ exhaustion 
“two-fold, therein day by day. My face is open, my 
“heart is upon its seat, and the crown with the serpent 
“ig upon me day by day. I am Ra, who is his own 
“protector, and nothing shall ever cast me to the 
“ oround.” 


158 OF REPULSING SERPENTS [Chap. xxxiii. 


CHAPTER XXXIII. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 6). | 


Vignette : This Chapter is without a vignette in the Papyrus 

of Nu, but in one MS. the deceased, with a knife in each hand, 

is seen attacking four serpents, and in another four serpents 

only are given; see Naville, op. cit., Bd. I. Bl. 46. In the Turin 

Papyrus (Lepsius, op. crt., Bl. 17) the deceased is spearing a 
single serpent. 


Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF REPULSING SERPENTS 
(or worms) Nu, the overseer of the house of the over- 
seer of the seal, triumphant, saith :—(2) 


“Hail, thou serpent Rerek, advance not hither. 
“Behold Seb and Shu. Stand still now, and thou 
“shalt eat the rat which is an abominable thing unto 
“Ra, and (3) thou shalt crunch the bones of the filthy 


EC Cauie 


Chap. xxxiv, AGAINST SNAKE BITE 159 


CHAPTER XXXIV. 
[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No, 10,477, sheet 6). ] 


Vignette ; This Chapter is without a vignette in the Theban 
and Saite Recensions. 


Text: (1) THE CHaArreR OF Nor [LETTING] OsIRIS 
NU, TRIUMPHANT, BE BITTEN BY SNAKES (07 WORMS) 
IN THE UNDERWORLD. (2) He saith :— 


“© Serpent! I am the flame which shineth upon the 
“Opener (?) of hundreds of thousands of years, and the 
“standard of the god Tenpu,” or (as others say), “ the 
“standard of young plants and flowers. Depart ye (3) 
“from me, for I am the divine Maftet.”?! 


! So far back as 1867 the late Dr. Birch identified the animal 
maftet with the lynx. 


160 AGAINST DEATH BY SERPENTS (Chap. xxxv. 


CHAPTER XXXYV. 
[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 6). ] 


Vignette: This Chapter is without a vignette in the Papyrus 

of Nu, but in the Brocklehurst Papyrus three serpents form 

the vignette (see Naville, op. ct., Bd. I. Bl. 48); in the Turin 

Papyrus (Lepsius, op. c?t., Bl. 17) the vignette shows the 

deceased in the act of spearing a serpent. See the vignette to 
Chapter XX XIII. 


Text: (1) THe CuHarrer or not [LETTine] No, 
THE OVERSEER OF THE HOUSE OF THE OVERSEER OF 
THE SEAL, TRIUMPHANT, BE DEVOURED BY SERPENTS 
IN THE UNDERWORLD. He saith -— 


“Hail, thou god Shu! (2) Behold Tattu! Behold 
“Shu! Hail Tattu! [Shu] hath the head-dress of the 
‘“ooddess Hathor. They nurse Osiris. Behold the 
‘two-fold being who is about to eat me! Alighting 
“from the boat I depart (?), (8) and the serpent-fiend 
‘‘Seksek passeth me by. Behold sém and daget flowers 
“are kept under guard (?). This being is Osiris, and 
“he maketh entreaty for his tomb. (4) The eyes of 
“the divine prince are dropped, and he performeth the 
‘reparation which is to be done for thee; [he] giveth 
‘“Tunto thee thy] portion of right and truth according 
“to the decision concerning the states and conditions 
“Tof men].” 


Chap. xxxvi. 2] REPULSING APSHAIT 161 


CHAPTER XXXVI. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 8). ] 


From the Papyrus of Nekht, 


Vignette : This Chapter is without a vignette in the Papyrus 
of Nu, but in others containing the Theban Recension (see 
Naville, op. cit., Bd. I. Bl. 49) the vignettes either show the 
deceased spearing a beetle, or standing, with a knife in one 
hand and a staff in the other, before a pedestal upon which 
stands the insect Apshait, which has been identified with the 
cockroach. The dpshait.is probably the beetle which is often 
found crushed between the bandages of poorly made mummies, 
or even inside the body itself, where it has forced its way in 
search of food. 


Text : (1) Toe CHAprer or DriviInG Away ApsHalr. 
Osiris Nu, the overseer of the house of the overseer of 
the seal, triumphant, saith :—(2) 


“Depart from me, O thou that hast lips which gnaw, 
“for I am Khnemu, the lord of Peshennu,' and [I] 


1 Read: ‘‘ the lord of the city of Shennu,” 7.e., of Kom Ombos. 
Se VOLN Ts M 


162 REPULSING APSHAIT 


“bring the words of the gods to Ra, and I report (3) 
‘“‘Imy] message to the lord thereof.” ! 

In the Papyrus of Nekht (Brit. Mus. No. 10,471, 
sheet 14) is a chapter entitled, “The Chapter of 
Repulsing the Pig,” and the accompanying vignette 
represents the deceased piercing a pig with a spear, and 
at the same time holding with one hand the end of a 
rope by which a huge serpent is fettered. The text 
which follows the title of this chapter is that of 
Chapter XXXYVI., and the only explanation of this 
unusual vignette is that the scribe confused the 
proper name Apshait with the word for “pig,” shad 
Inns Ee Sy and wrote down the latter word. The 
artist, seeing the word for “pig” in the text, drew the 
picture of a pig in the vignette. The following is the 
vignette :— 


! Or, ‘‘I report [my] message to Nebes” (or Nebses). 


Chap. xxxvii.] REPULSING MERTI 163 


CHAPTER XXXVII, 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 8). ] 


From the Papyrus of Amen-hetep. From the Papyrus of Nekht. 


Vignette ; Two uraei, with tails entwined, upon the emblem 

of gold (Naville, op. ecit., Bd. I. Bl. 50); or, the deceased 

threatening two serpents with a knife; in the vignette of this 

Chapter in the Turin Papyrus the deceased is seen spearing a 
serpent (Lepsius, op. evt., Bl. 17). 


Text: (1) THE CHAPTER OF DRIVING BACK THE 
two Mrrtrt GoppEssEs. Nu, the overseer of the house 
of the overseer of the seal, triumphant, saith :— 


“Homage to you, ye two Reht goddesses,' ye two 
“Sisters, ye two Mert (2) goddesses, I bring a message 
“to you concerning my magical words, I shine from 
“the Sektet boat, I am Horus the son of Osiris, and I 
“have come to see (3) my father Osiris.” 


| The goddesses Isis and Nephthys, 


164 OF LIVING BY AIR [Chap, xxxvilia, 1 


CHAPTER XXXVIIIA. 


[From the Papyrus of Nebseni (Brit. Mus. No. 9900, sheet 12). ] 


Vignette : The deceased holding a sail, symbolic of air. 


Text: (1) Tar CHAPTER OF LIVING BY AIR IN THE 
UNDERWORLD. The scribe Nebseni, the lord to whom 
veneration is paid, saith :— 

“Tam the god Tem], who cometh forth out of (2) 
‘Nu into the watery abyss. I have received [my habi- 
“tation of Amentet, and have given commands] with 
“my words to the [Khus] whose abiding places are 
‘hidden (3), to the Khus and to the double Lion-god. I 
‘have made journeys round about and I have sung 
“hymns of joy in the boat of Khepera. I have eaten 
“therein, I have gained power (4) therein, and I live 
“therein through the breezes [which are there]. I am 
“the guide in the boat of Ra, and he openeth out for 
‘‘me a path; he maketh a passage for me through the 
“gates (5) of the god Seb, I have seized and carried 


Chap. xxxviii.a. 8] OF LIVING BY AIR 165 


“away those who live in the embrace of the god Ur 
““(i.e., Mighty One) ; I am the guide of those who live 
“in their shrines, the two brother-gods Horus and Set ; 
“and I bring the (6) noble ones with me. I enter in 
“and I come forth, and my throat is not slit; I go into 
“the boat of Maat, and I pass in among (7) those who 
“live in the Afet boat, and who are in the following of 
“Ra, and are nigh unto him in his horizon. I live 
“after my death day by day, and I am strong even as 
“is the double Lion-god. (8) I live, and I am delivered 
“after my death, I, the scribe Nebseni, the lord of 
“piety, who fill the earth and come forth like the lily 
‘of mother-of-emerald, of the god Hetep of the two 
“Jands.” 


CHAPTER XXXYVIIIs. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 12). ] 


Vignette: The deceased, holding in his left hand a sail, 
symbolic of air, and attacking three serpents with a knife which 


166 OF LIVING BY AIR [Chap. xxxviii.n. 


he holds in his right hand (see Naville, op. cit., Bd. I. Bl. 52) 
In the Turin Papyrus (Lepsius, 7'odtenbuch, Bl. 17) the deceased 
holds a sail in the left hand, and the symbol of life in the right. 


Text: (1) Tum CHApTer OF LIVING BY AIR IN THE 
UNDERWORLD. Nu, the overseer of the house of the 
overseer of the seal, triumphant, the son of the overseer — 
of the house of the overseer of the seal, Amen-hetep, 
triumphant, saith :—(2) 


“T am the double Lion-god, the first-born of Ra and 
“Tem of Ah-khebti,! [the gods] who dwell in their 
“divine chambers. Those who dwell (3) in their 
“divine abodes have become my guides, and they make 
“paths for me as they revolve in the watery abyss of 
“the sky by the side of the path of the boat of Tem. 
(4) I stand upon the timbers (?) of the boat of Ra, and 
“T recite his ordinances to the beings who have know- 
“ledge, and I am the herald of his words to him whose 
“throat stinketh. (5) I set free my divine fathers at 
‘“eventide. I close the lips of my mouth, and I eat 
“like unto a living being. I have life (6) in Tattu, 
‘Cand I live again after death like Ra day by day.” 

1 T.e., ‘‘ the city of the papyrus swamps,” alluding to the place 


in the Delta where Isis brought forth her son Horus after the death 
of Osiris. 


Chap. xxxix. 5] OF REPULSING REREK 167 


CHAPTER XXXIX. 


[From the Papyrus of Mes-em-neter (see Nayille, op. cit., Bd. I. 
BI. 53). ] 


Vignette : The deceased spearing a serpent. 


Text: (1) Tue CHAPTER OF DRIVING BACK THE 
SERPENT REREK IN THE UNDERWORLD. Osiris Mes- 
em-neter saith :— 


(2) “Get thee back, depart, retreat (?) from [me], O 
‘‘ Aaapef, withdraw, or thou shalt be drowned at the 
‘Pool of Nu, at the place where thy father (3) hath 
“ ordered that thy slaughter shall be performed. Depart 
“thou from the divine birthplace of Ra wherein is thy 
“terror, Iam Ra who dwelleth in his terror. (4) Get 
“thee back, Fiend, before the darts of his beams. Ra 
“hath overthrown thy words, the gods have turned thy 
“face backwards, the Lynx hath (5) torn open thy breast, 


168 THE OVERTHROW OF APEP _ [Chap. xxxix. 5 


“the Scorpion! hath cast fetters upon thee; and Maat 
‘hath sent forth thy destruction. Those who are in 
“(6) the ways have overthrown thee; fall down and 
“depart, O Apep, thou Enemy of Ra! O thou that 
‘“‘passest over the region in the eastern part of heaven 
‘with the sound of the roaring thunder-cloud, (7) O Ra 
“‘ who openest the gates of the horizon straightway on thy 
‘appearance, [Apep] hath sunk helpless under [thy] 
“oashings. IJ have performed thy will, O Ra, I have per- 
‘formed thy will; I have done that which is fair, I have 
“done that which is fair, I have laboured for the peace 
“of (8) Ra. [I] have made to advance thy fetters, O 
“Ra, and Apep hath fallen through thy drawing them 
“tight. The gods of the south and of the north, of the 
“west and of the (9) east have fastened chains upon him, 
“and they have fettered him with fetters ; the god Rekes 
“hath overthrown him and the god Hertit hath put him 
“in chains. Ra setteth, Ra setteth; Ra is strong at 
‘‘{his] (10) setting. Apep hath fallen, Apep, the enemy 
“of Ra, departeth. Greater is the punishment [which 
“hath been inflicted on] thee than the sting (?) which 
“is in the Scorpion goddess, and mightily hath she, 
“whose course is everlasting, worked it upon thee and 
“with deadly effect. (11) Thou shalt never enjoy the 
“delights of love, thou shalt never fulfil thy desire, O 
“ Apep, thou Enemy of Ra! He maketh thee to go 
“back, O thou who art hateful to Ra; he looketh upon 


1 J.e., the goddess Serqet or Selket. 
2 T.e., the goddess of right and truth. 


Chap. xxxix. 18] THE OVERTHROW OF APEP 169 


“thee, (12) get thee back! [He] pierceth [thy] head, 
“The| cutteth through thy face, [he] divideth [thy] 
“head at the two sides of the ways, and it is crushed 
“in his land; thy bones are smashed in pieces, thy 
“members are hacked off thee, and the god |A]ker! hath 
“condemned (13) thee, O Apep, thou enemy of Ra! 
“Thy mariners are those who keep the reckoning for 
“thee, [O Ra, as thou] advancest, and thou restest 
“there wherein are the offerings made to thee. [As 
“thou] advancest, [as thou] advancest towards the 
‘ House (14) the advance which thou hast made towards 
“the House is a prosperous advance ; let not any baleful 
“obstacle proceed from thy mouth against me when 
“thou workest on my behalf. I am Set who let loose 
“the storm-clouds and the (15) thunder in the horizon 
“of heaven even as [doth] the god Netcheb-ab-f.” 
“*Ffail” saith the god Tem, ‘Make strong your faces, 
“QO soldiers of Ra, for I have driven back the god 
(16) Nentcha in the presence of the divine sovereign 
“princes.” ‘Hail,’ saith the god Seb, ‘Make ye firm 
“those who are upon their seats which are in the boat 
“of Khepera, (17) take ye your ways, [grasping] your 
“weapons of war in your hands,’ ‘ Hail,’ saith Hathor, 
“*Take ye your armour. ‘Hail, saith Nut, ‘Come 
“and repulse the god (18) Tcha who pursueth him that 
“dwelleth in his shrine and who setteth out on his way 
“alone, namely, Neb-er-tcher, who cannot be repulsed.’ 


! T.e., the double Lion-god who presided over the sun’s course in 
the night sky. 


170 THE OVERTHROW OF APEP  [Chap. xxxix. 19 


“Hail,” say those gods who dwell in their (19) com- 
‘panies and who go round about the Turquoise Pool, 
““Come, O mighty One, we praise and we will deliver 
“the Mighty One [who dwelleth in] the divine Shrine, 
‘from whom proceeds the company of the gods, (20) let 
“commemorations be made for him, let praise be given 
“to him, let words [of praise] be recited before him by 
“you and by me.’ ‘ Hail,’ saith Nut to thy Sweet One. 
“* Hail,’ say those who dwell among the gods, (21) ‘He 
“cometh forth, he findeth [his] way, he maketh captives 
“among the gods, he hath taken possession of the 
“goddess Nut, and Seb standeth up. Hail, thou 
“terrible one, the company of the gods is on (22) the 
“march. Hathor quaketh with terror, and Ra hath 
“triumphed over Apep.” 


CHAPTER XL. 


[From the Papyrus of Ra (see Naville, op. cit., Bd. I. Bl. 54) and 
from the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 8). ] 


Vignette : The deceased spearing a serpent which has sprung 
upon an ass and is biting into his back; see Brit. Mus. 
No. 10,471, sheet 21; and Naville, op. ctt., Bd. I. Bl. 54. 


Chap. xl.] REPULSING THE FOE OF RA L7. 


Text: (1) Tue CHAPTER OF DRIVING BACK THE 
EATER or THE Ass.' Osiris Ra, triumphant, saith :— 

I. “Get thee back, (2) Hai, thou impure one, thou 
“abomination of Osiris! Thoth hath cut off thy head, 
“and I have performed upon thee all the things which 
“the company of the gods (3) ordered concerning thee 
“in the matter of the work of thy slaughter. Get thee 
“back, thou abomination of Osiris, from the Neshmet 
“boat .... which (4) advanceth with a fair wind. Ye 
“are holy, O all ye gods, and [ye] have cast down head- 
“long the enemies (5) of Osiris; the gods of Ta-ur 
“shout for joy. Get thee back, O thou Eater of the 
“(6) Ass, thou abomination of the god Haas who 
“ dwelleth in the underworld. I know thee, I know 
“thee, I know thee, I know thee. Who art thou? (7) 

II. (2) “On thy face, [O fiend], and devour me not, 
“for I am pure, and I am with the time which cometh 
“of itself. Thou shalt not come to me, O thou that 
“comest® without being invoked, and whose [time of 
“coming| is unknown. I am the lord of thy mouth, 
“oet thee back (3), thou and thy desires (?) Hail, 
“ Haas,® with his flint [knife] Horus hath cut asunder 


1 “Ass” is here a name of the Sun-god Ra, and the “ Hater of 
the Ass” is a name of Set or of one of his fiends. 

2 These words are from the Papyrus of Ra. 

8 A god of whom little is known. He is called the ‘‘ great god of 
the West,” and is said to be the deity of the dwellers in the western 
desert and mountains ; subsequently he was identified with a form 
of Osiris, and was especially worshipped in the sixth nome of Lower 


Egypt. 


172 REPULSING THE EATER OF THE ASS [Chap al. 3 


“thy members, and thou art destroyed within thy com- 
“pany, and thy bend (or dwelling-place) is destroyed 
“for thee by the company of thy gods who dwell in the 
“cities of Pe and (4) Tep. He that slayeth [thee] there 
“is in the form of the Kye of Horus, and I have driven 
“thee away as thou wast advancing, and I have van- 
“quished thee by the winds of my mouth. O thou 
“Kater (5) of those who commit sins, who dost plunder 
‘and spoil, I have [committed] no sin ; therefore let my 
“palette and the writings’ with hostile charges [against 
‘‘me upon them] be given unto me, I have done no 
“wrong in the presence of (6) the sovereign princes, 
“therefore shoot not thy [venom] at me. I give, do 
“thou take according to what I order; snatch me not 
“away, and eat me not, for I am the lord of life, the 
“Prince (Life, Health, Strength!) of the horizon.” 


1 Apparently the palette upon which Thoth records the result of 
the weighing of the heart in the Hall of Osiris. 


Chap. xli, 4] OF AVOIDING SLAUGHTER 73 


CHAPTER XLI. 


[From the Papyrus of Nebseni, sheet 25. ] 


Vignette: The deceased armed with a knife and a short 

staff; see Naville, op. eit., Bd. I. Bl. 55, In the Turin Papyrus 

the deceased is piercing a serpent which lies writhing on a 
barred instrument (see Lepsius, op. ec7t., Bl. 19). 


Text: (1) THE CHAPTER OF DRIVING AWAY THE 
SLAUGHTERINGS WHICH ARE PERFORMED IN THE 
UNDERWORLD. Nebseni, the scribe and designer in the 
Temples of Upper and Lower Egypt, he to whom fair 
veneration is paid, (2) the son of the scribe and artist 
Thena, triumphant, saith :— 


“Fail, Tem, I have become glorious (or a Khu) in 
“the presence of the double Lion-god, the great (3) 
“ood, therefore open thou unto me the gate of the god 
“Seb. I smell the earth (i.e, I bow down so that 
“my nose toucheth the ground) of the great god who 
“dwelleth in the underworld, and I advance (4) into 


174 OF AVOIDING SLAUGHTER (Chap. xli, 


‘the presence of the company of the gods who dwell 
“with the beings who are in the underworld. Hail, 
“thou guardian of the divine door of the city of Beta, 
“thou Neti! who dwellest in Amentet, (5) I eat food, 
“and I have life through the air, and the god Atch-ur 
‘“Jeadeth me with [him] to the mighty boat of (6) 
‘Khepera. I hold converse with the divine mariners 
‘at eventide, I enter in, I go forth, (7) and I see the 
‘being who is there; I lift him up, and I say that 
“which I have to say unto him whose throat stinketh 
‘(for lack of air]. I have life, (8) and I am delivered, 
“having lain down in death, Hail, thou that bringest 
‘ offerings and oblations, bring forward thy mouth and 
‘make to draw nigh the writings (9) (or lists) of offer- 
“ings and oblations. Set thou Right aud Truth firmly 
‘upon their throne, make thou the writings to draw 
“nigh, and set thou up the goddesses (10) in the 
“presence of Osiris, the mighty god, the Prince of ever- 
“Jastingness, who counteth his years, who hearkeneth 
“unto those who are in the islands (or pools), who 
“yaiseth his (11) right shoulder, who judgeth the divine 
“princes, and who sendeth [the deceased] into the 
‘presence of the great sovereign princes who live in 
“the underworld.” 


! T.e., the ‘* god of the double red crown.” 


Chap, xlii. 3] OF AVOIDING SLAUGHTER I 


N 
Ur 


CHAPTER XLII, 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 6). ] 


Vignette : The deceased standing before Osiris with his left 

hand raised to his mouth; or the deceased holding a serpent in 

his hands; or the deceased addressing a serpent which has its 

head turned away ; or the deceased drawing a cord from round 
the top of a fet (?), emblem of stability.! 


Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF DRIVING BACK THE 
(2) SLAUGHTERINGS WHICH ARE PERFORMED IN SUTEN- 
HENEN. Osiris Nu, triumphant, saith :— 


“O thou land of the Sceptre (literally, wood)! O 
“thou White Crown of the divine form! O thou rest- 
“ing place of the boat! I am the Child, (3) I am the 
“ Qhild, I am the Child, I am the Child. Hail, Abu-ur, 
“thou sayest day by day: ‘The slaughter-block is made 


1 For these see Naville, op. cit., Bd. I. Bl, 57. 


176 DEIFICATION OF MEMBERS [ Chap, xlii. 3 


“ready as thou knowest, and thou hast come to decay.’ 
“T am (4) Ra, the stablisher of those who praise | him]. 
“Tam the knot of the god within the Aser tree, the 
“doubly beautiful one, who is more splendid than 
“yesterday (say four times). I am Ra, the stablisher 
‘‘of those who praise [him]. (5) I am the knot of the 
“ood within the Aser tree, and my going forth is the 
‘going forth [of Ra] on this day.” 

‘My hair is the hair of Nu. My face is the face of 
“the Disk. My eyes are the eyes of (6) Hathor. My 
“ears are the ears of Ap-uat.! My nose is the nose of 
“Khenti-khas. My lips are the lips of Anpu. My 
“teeth are the teeth of (7) Serget.2 My neck is the 
“neck of the divine goddess Isis. My hands are the 
“hands of Ba-neb-Tattu.* My fore-arms are the fore- 
‘arms of Neith,' the Lady of Sais. My backbone is 
(8) the backbone of Suti. My phallus is the phallus ~ 
“of Osiris. My reins are the reins of the Lords of 
‘“Kher-iha. My chest is the chest of the Mighty one 
“of Terror. (9) My belly and back are the belly and 
“back of Sekhet. My buttocks are the buttocks of the 
“Hye of Horus. My hips and legs are the hips and 
“leos of Nut. My feet are the feet of (10) Ptah. [My 
“fingers| and my leg-bones are the [fingers and] leg- 


1 T.e., ‘the opener of the roads,” 


sometimes identified with Osiris. 

2 The Scorpion goddess. 

3 T.e., “Ram, Lord of Tattu,” a name of Osiris. 

4 One of the oldest goddesses of Egypt. She was the goddess of 
hunting and weaving, but was identified with many other goddesses 
such as Isis, Meh-urt, and their attributes were assigned to her, 


a jackal-headed god who is 


Chap. xlii. 16] DEIFICATION OF MEMBERS LAT, 


“bones of the Living Gods. There is no member of my 
‘body which is not the member of some god. The god 
“Thoth shieldeth my body (11) altogether, and I am 
“Ra day by day. I shall not be dragged back by my 
“arms, and none shall lay violent hold upon my hands. 
“And shall-do me hurt neither men, nor gods, (12) nor 
“the sainted dead, nor those who have perished, nor 
“any one of those of ancient times, nor any mortal, 
“nor any human being. I (13) am he who cometh 
“forth, advancing, whose name is unknown. I am 
“Yesterday, and Seer of millions of years is my name. 
“T pass along, I pass along the paths of the divine 
“celestial judges. (14) I am the lord of eternity, and 
“T decree and I judge like the god Khepera. I am the 
“Jord of the Ureret crown. I am he who dwelleth in 
“the Utchat [and in the Ege, in the Utchat and in the 
“ Kee, and it is given unto me to live [with] them. I 
“am he that dwelleth in the Utchat when it closeth, 
“and I exist by the strength thereof. I come forth and 
“JT shine; I enter in.and I come to life. I am in the 
‘ Utchat],' my seat is (15) upon my throne, and I sit in 
“the abode of splendour (?) before it. I am Horus and 
“(I) traverse millions of years. I have given the 
“decree [for the stablishing of] my throne and I am the 
“ruler thereof; and in very truth, my mouth keepeth 
“an even balance both in speech (16) and in silence. 
“Tn very truth, my forms are inverted. I am Un-nefer, 

! The words within brackets are supplied from the Papyrus of 
Mes-em-neter. 

VOL, I. N 


178 DEIFICATION OF MEMBERS (Chap, xlii, x 


“from one season even unto another, and what I have 
“is within me; [I am] (17) the only One, who pro- 
“ceedeth from an only One who goeth round about in 
“his course. J am he who dwelleth in the Utchat, no 
“evil thing of any form or kind shall spring up against 
‘me, and no baleful object, and no harmful thing, and 
“no disastrous thing shall happen unto (18) me. I 
“open the door in heaven, I govern my throne, and I 
“open up [the way] for the births [which take place] 
“on this day. JI am (?) the child who marcheth along 
“the road of Yesterday. [I am] To-day for untold 
“nations and peoples. (19) I am he who protecteth 
“you for millions of years, and whether ye be denizens 
‘of the heavens, or of the earth, or of the south, or of 
“the (20) north, or of the east, or of the west, the fear 
‘of me is in your bodies. I am he whose being has 
‘been moulded in his eye, and I shall not die again. 
‘My moment is in your bodies, but my (21) forms are 
“in my place of habitation. I am he who cannot be 
‘known, but the Red Ones have their faces directed 
“towards me. JI am the unveiled one. The season 
‘wherein [the god] created the heavens for me (22) and 
‘enlarged the bounds of the earth and made great the 
“progeny thereof cannot be found out; but they fail 
“and are not united [again]. My name setteth itself 
“apart from all things [and from] the great evil [which 
‘is in| the mouths [of men] by reason of the speech 
“which I address (23) unto you. I am he who riseth 
‘and shineth, the wall which cometh out of a wall, an 


Chap. xlii. 28] DEIFICATION OF MEMBERS 179 


“only One who proceedeth from an only One. There 
“is never a day that passeth without (24) the things 
“which appertain unto him being therein; passing, 
“ passing, passing, passing. Verily I say unto thee, I 
‘‘am the Sprout which cometh forth from Nu, and my 
“Mother is Nut. Hail, O (25) my Creator, I am he 
“who hath no power to walk, the great Knot who is 
“within yesterday. The might of my strength is 
“within my hand. I myself am not known, but I am 
“he who knoweth thee. (26) I cannot be held with 
“the hand, but I am he who ean hold thee in his hand. 
“Hail, O Ege! Hail, O Egg! I am Horus, he who 
“Jiveth for millions of years, whose flame shineth upon 
‘you (27) and bringeth your hearts to me. I have the 
“command of my throne and I advance at this season, 
“T have opened a path, and I have delivered myself 
“from all evil things. (28) I am the dog-headed 
“ape of gold three palms and two fingers [high], 
“which hath neither arms nor legs and dwelleth 
“in Het-ka-Ptah (Memphis), and I go forth as 
“ooeth forth the dog-headed ape that dwelleth in 
“ Het-ka-Ptah.” 

In the Papyrus of Ani, sheet 32, only a portion of 
this Chapter is given, i.e., the section which gives the 
names of the deities with whom the various members 
of the body of the deceased are identified. This section 
is arranged in tabular form, and carefully drawn 
vignettes giving pictures of the gods mentioned are 


added. 


180 DEIFICATION OF MEMBERS 


Nu. Ra. Hathor, Ap-uat. Anubis, Serqet. Isis. 


Vignette: The god Nu. 

Text: (Ll) The hair of Osiris Ani, triumphant, is the 
hair of Nu. 

Vignette : Ra, hawk-headed, and wearing a disk. 

Text: (2) The face of Osiris, the scribe Ani, trium- 
phant, is the face of Ra. 

Vignette : The goddess Hathor, with horns and a disk on 
her head. 

Text: (3) The eyes of Osiris Ani, triumphant, are 
the eyes of Hathor. 

Vignette : The god Ap-uat, jackal-headed, on a standard. 

Text: (4) The ears of Osiris Ani, triumphant, are 
the ears of Ap-uat. 

Vignette : The god Anpu, jackal-headed. 

Text: (5) The lips of Osiris Ani, triumphant, are 
the lips of Anpu. 

Vignette : The scorpion-goddess Serqet holding the em- 
blems of life and eternity. 

Text: (6) The teeth of Osiris Ani, triumphant, are 
the teeth of Serqet. 

Vignette : The goddess Isis. 


DEIFICATION OF MEMBERS 181 


fod 


Phexte 
the neck of Isis. 


) The neck of Osiris Ani, triumphant, is 


Ba-neb Uatchet, Mert, Neith, Set. A lord of Mighty One 
Tattu, Kheraha, of Terror, 


Vignette: A ram-headed god, having a serpent between 
his horns. 


Text: (8) The hands of Osiris Ani, triumphant, are 
the hands of Ba-neb-Tattu. 

Vignette : The goddess Uatchet. 

Text: (9) The shoulder of Osiris Ani, triumphant, 
is the shoulder of Uatchet. 


Vignette : The goddess Mert standing on the symbol of 
gold; her hands are outstretched, and she has on her head a 
cluster of plants. 


Text: (10) The throat of Osiris Ani, triumphant, is 
the throat of Mert. 

Vignette : The goddess Neith. 

Text: (11) The fore-arms of Osiris Ani, triumphant, 
are the fore-arms of the lady of Sais. 

Vignette : The god Set. 

Text: (12) The backbone of Osiris Ani, triumphant, 
is the backbone of Set, 


182 DEIFICATION OF MEMBERS 


Vignette: A god, 

Text: (13) The chest of Osiris Ani, triumphant, is 
the chest of the lords of Kheraha. 

Vignette: A god. 

Text: (14) The flesh of Osiris Ani, triumphant, is 
the flesh of the Mighty One of Terror. 


Sekhet, Eye of Osiris. Nut. Ptah. Orion, The Living 
Horus, Uraei, 


Vignette : A goddess wearing the solar disk. 

Text: (15) The reins and back of Osiris Ani, trium- 
phant, are the reins and back of Sekhet. 

Vignette : An Utchat upon a pylon. 

Text: (16) The buttocks of Osiris Ani, triumphant, 
are the buttocks of the Eye of Horus. 


Vignette : Osiris, wearing the Atef crown and holding the 
flail and crook. : 


Text: (17) The phallus of Osiris Ani, triumphant, is 
the phallus of Osiris. 

Vignette : The goddess Nut. 

Text : (18) The legs of Osiris Ani, triumphant, are 
the legs of Nut. 


Vignette: The god Ptah, standing on the pedestal of 
Maat, 


DEIFICATION OF MEMBERS 183 


Text: (19) The feet of Osiris Ani, triumphant, are 
the feet of Ptah. 

Vignette : The star Orion. 

Text: (20) The fingers of Osiris Ani, triumphant, 
are the fingers of Orion. 

Vignette : Three uraei. 

Text: (21) The leg-bones of Osiris Ani, triumphant, 
are the leg-bones of the living uraei. 


In the Papyrus of Ani, following immediately after the 
tabulated form of Chapter XLIL., is a vignette in which 
four dog-headed apes are seen seated each at a corner of 
the Lake of Fire. The text below it is in that of the 
Rubric which usually follows the last section of Chapter 
CXXYV., though from its position in the papyrus it would 
seem to be connected in some way with Chapter XLII. 
The vignette is given below, but the translation of the 
text will be found at the end of Chapter CXXYV. 


184 AGAINST DECAPITATION (Chap. xliii, 


CHAPTER XLIII. 


[From the Papyrus of Ani (Brit. Mus, No. 10,470, sheet 17). ] 


aS 


Chit Wa, WR 
cality Nala. (\ nly é 
AAs 
& (| . i) AD NX. 


I 


Vignette : The deceased adoring three gods, each of whom 
holds the emblem of life in his right hand and a sceptre in his 
left. 


Text: (1) Tur CHAPTER OF NOT LETTING THE 
HEAD OF A MAN BE CUT OFF FROM HIM IN THE 
UNDERWORLD. Osiris Ani, triumphant, saith :—(2) 

“T am the Great One, son of the Great One; [I am] 
“Fire, the son of Fire, to whom was given (3) his head 
“after it had been cut off. The head of Osiris was not 
“taken away from him, let not the head of Osiris (4) 
“Ani be taken away from him. I have knit myself 
“together ; I have made myself whole and complete; I 
“have renewed my youth; I am Osiris, the lord of 
“eternity.” 


Chap. xliv..4] AGAINST THE SECOND DEATH 185 


CHAPTER XLIV. 


[From the Papyrus of Ani (Brit. Mus. No. 10,470, sheet 16). ] 


Vignette : The scribe Ani, clothed in white and seated in a 

chair; he holds in the right hand the ‘herp sceptre, and in the 

left a long staff. Before him is a table. In the Turin Papyrus 

(Lepsius, op. ezt., Bl. 20) the deceased is seen standing before a 
funeral coffer or shrine. 


Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF NOT DYING A SECOND 
TIME IN THE UNDERWORLD, Osiris Ani, triumphant, 
saith :— 

“My place of hiding is opened, my place of hiding is 
“vevealed. The Ahus have (2) fallen into the dark- | 
“ness, but the Eye of Horus hath made me mighty 
“and the god Ap-uat hath nursed me like a babe. I 
“have hidden (3) myself with you, O ye stars that 
“never diminish! My brow is like unto that of Ra; 
“my face is open; (4) my heart is upon its throne; I 
“have power over the speech of my mouth; I have 


186 AGAINST CORRUPTION [Chap. xlv. 


“knowledge ; in very truth I am Ra himself. I am 
“not held to be a person of no account; (5) and 
“violence shall not be done unto me. Thy father 
“liveth for thee, O son of Nut; I am thy son, O Great 
“One, and I have seen the hidden things (6) which 
“belong unto thee. I am crowned king of the gods, I 
‘shall not die a second time in the underworld.” 


CHAPTER XLV. 


From the Papyrus of Ani (Brit. Mus. No. 10,470, sheet 16). 
PJ 


Vignette : The mummy of the scribe Ani being embraced by 
Anubis, jackal-headed, the god of the dead. 


Text: (1) Tur CHAPTER OF NOT SUFFERING COR- 
RUPTION IN THE UNDERWORLD. Osiris Ani, trium- 
phant, saith :— 


“© thou who canst not move, like unto Osiris; O 
“thou who canst not move, like unto Osiris! (2) O 


Chap. slvi.] AGAINST DECAY 187 


“thou whose limbs cannot move, like unto [those of] 
“QOsiris! Let not thy limbs be without movement ; let 
“them not suffer corruption; let them not pass away ; 
“let them not decay ; and let them be fashioned (8) for 
“me as if I myself were Osiris.” 


RUBRIC: If [the deceased] know this chapter, he shall 
never suffer corruption in the underworld. 


CHAPTER XLVL 


[From the Papyrus of Ani (Brit. Mus. No. 10,470, sheet 16). ] 


Vignette: The doorway of the tomb. By one post stands 
the soul of the scribe Ani in the form of a human-headed hawk, 
and by the other the Bennw bird. 


Text: (1) Toe CHAPTER OF NOT PERISHING AND 
OF BECOMING ALIVE IN THE UNDERWORLD. Osiris 
Ani saith :— 


“Fail, (2) ye children of the god Shu! The Tuat 


188 OF PRESERVING THE THRONE [Chap., xlvii. 


(underworld) hath gained the mastery over his 
“diadem.' Like the Hammemet* beings may I arise, 
‘even as Osiris doth arise and fare forth.” 


CHAPTER XLVIL. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 8). ] 


Vignette: In the Theban Recension this Chapter has no 

vignette; but in the Turin Papyrus (Lepsius, op. czt., Bl. 20) a 

funeral shrine is depicted with the soul of the deceased on one 
side of it, and the Bennw bird on the other. 


Text: (1) Tue CHAPTER OF NOT ALLOWING THE 
SEAT AND THRONE OF NU, THE OVERSEER OF THE 
HOUSE OF THE OVERSEER OF THE SEAL, TO.BE TAKEN 


1 The Papyrus of Nebseni reads:—‘‘ Hach dawn gaineth the 
mastery over [his] diadem with rays of light; [your] hands rise 
up, [your] heads rise up each day.” 

* A class of celestial beings who either haye been or may become 
men and women, 


Chap, xlvii.] OF PRESERVING THE THRONE 189 


AWAY (2) FROM HIM IN THE UNDERWORLD. He 
saith :— 

“O my Seat, O my Throne, come ye to me, and go 
“ye round about me. I am your lord, O ye gods, come 
“ye and take up your places in my train. (3) I am 
‘the son of your lord, and ye belong to me through my 
“divine father who hath made you.” 


CHAPTER XLVII. 
[From the Papyrus of Nebseni (Brit. Mus. No. 9,900, sheet 8). ] 


“OQ my Seat, O my Throne, come ye to me, and go ye 
“round about me, O ye gods. I am a spiritual body 
(sah), therefore let me rise up among those who follow 
“the great god. I am the son of Maati, and that 
“which he abominateth is the speech of falsehood. I 
“am in triumph!” 


CHAPTER XLVIII. 


This Chapter is given twice in the Saite Recension, 
once as Chapter X. and once as Chapter XLVIII. ; for 
the translation of it as found in the Papyrus of Ani, 
sheet 18, see above, p. 58. 


Ig0 OF AVOIDING THE BLOCK OF SLAUGHTER ([Ch.1a. 


CHAPTER XLIX., 


This Chapter is given twice in the Saite Recension, 
once as Chapter XI. and once as Chapter XLIX. ; for 
the translation of it as found in the Papyrus of Nu, 
sheet 21, see above, p. 59. 


CHAPTER L.A. 


[From the Papyrus of Nebseni (Brit. Mus. No. 9,900, sheet 12). ] 


Vignette : In the Papyrus of Ani, sheet 16, and in the Turin 
Papyrus (Lepsius, op. cit., Bl. 21) the deceased is represented 
standing with his back to a gory knife which rests on its block. 


Text: (1) THe CHAPTER oF (2) NOT ENTERING IN 
UNTO THE BLOCK OF THE GoD. Nebseni saith :— 


‘The four bones (or knots) of my neck and back have 
‘been joined together for me by the (8) Guardian of 


Ch.1.8.2] OF AVOIDING THE BLOCK OF SLAUGHTER IgI 


‘heaven, who stablished the knot for him who lay 
“helpless at the breasts [of his mother] on the day of 
“cutting off the hair. The bones of my neck and back 
(4) have been knit together by the god Set and by the 
“company of the gods as strongly as they were in 
“the time that is past; may nothing happen to break 
“them apart! Make ye me strong! The goddess Nut 
“hath joined together the bones of my (5) neck and 
“back, [and they are] even as they were in the time 
“that is past, when I saw the true birth of the gods in 
“visible forms take place in its true and right order. I 
“am Peti, and I am in the presence of the great god.” 


CHAPTER L.s. 
[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 19). | 


Vignette; This Chapter is without a vignette in the Theban 
Recension, 
Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF NOT ENTERING IN 
UNTO THE BLOCK. The overseer of the house of the 
overseer of the seal, triumphant, saith :— 


“T have joined up my head and neck in heaven [and] 
“in earth. (2) Behold it is Ra who, day by day, 
“stablisheth the knot for him who stood helpless upon 
‘his legs on the day of cutting off the hair, The god 
“ Suti and the company of the gods have joined together 


I9g2 OF AVOIDING THE BLOCK OF SLAUGHTER [Ch.1.s.5 


“my (8) neck and my back strongly, and they are even 
“as they were in the time that is past; may nothing 
“happen to break them apart! Make ye me strong 
“against the slaughterer of my divine father. (4) I 
“have gotten power over my two hands. The goddess 
‘Nut hath joimed together the bones of my neck and 
“back, and I behold them as they were in the time 
“that is past, when as yet I had not seen Maat, and 
“when the gods were not born (5) in visible forms. I 
“am Penti, and I am in the form of the destroyer of 
“the great gods.” 


CHAPTER LI. 


{From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 8). ] 


i 


=< 


Vignette : This Chapter is without a vignette in the Theban 
Recension; in the Turin Papyrus (Lepsius, op. ett,, Bl. 21) an 
upright figure of the deceased forms the vignette. 


Chaps, li., li. | OF AVOIDING UNCLEAN FOOD 193 


Text: (1) Tor CHAPTER OF NOT MARCHING TO BE 
OVERTHROWN IN THE UNDERWORLD. ‘The overseer of 
the palace, Nu, triumphant, saith :— (2) 

“That which is an abomination unto me, that which 
“is an abomination unto me, let me not eat. That 
“which is an abomination unto me, that which is an 
“abomination unto me is filth; let me not eat it [in 
“the place of] the sepulchral cakes which are offered 
“unto the Kas.’ (5) Let me not be destroyed thereby ; 
“let me not be compelled to take it into my hands; 
“and let me not be compelled to walk thereon in my 
“ sandals.” 


CHAPTER LI. 


{From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 11). ] 


Vignette : This Chapter is without a vignette in the Theban 

Recension; in the Turin Papyrus (Lepsius, op. cit., Bl. 21) the 

deceased is seated on a chair and his left hand is stretched out 
over a table. 


1 Or, ‘* Let me not be compelled to eat it [in the absence of] the 
sepulchral cakes and provisions which shall be offered unto me.” 


VO, I. 0 


194 OF AVOIDING UNCLEAN FOOD [Chap. lii. x 


Text: (1) Tor CHAPTER OF NOT EATING FILTH IN 
THE UNDERWORLD. ‘The overseer of the house of the 
overseer of the seal, Nu, triumphant, saith :— 

“That which is an abomination unto me, that which 
“ig an abomination unto me, let me not eat. That 
‘which is an abomination unto me, (2) that which is 
“an abomination unto me is filth ; let me not eat it [in 
“the place of| the sepulchral cakes [which are offered 
“unto| the Kas. Let it not light upon my body; let 
‘““me not be obliged to take it into my hands ; and let 
“me not be obliged to (3) walk thereon in my sandals. 
“What, now, wilt thou live upon in the presence of 
“the gods? [Let food] come unto me from the place 
‘whither thou wilt bring food (?), and let me live upon 
“the seven loaves of bread (4) which shall be brought as 
‘food before Horus, and upon the bread which is 
‘“Dbrought before Thoth. The gods shall say unto me: 
«What manner of food wouldst thou have given unto 
‘thee?’ [And I reply:] Let me eat my food under 
“the sycamore tree (5) of my lady, the goddess Hathor, 
‘‘and let my times be among the divine beings who 
“have alighted thereon. Let me have the power to 
“order my own fields in Tattu (Mendes) (6) and my 
“own growing crops in Annu (Heliopolis). Let me 
“live upon bread made of white barley, and let my 
“beer be [made] from red grain, and may the persons 
“of (7) my father and mother be given unto me as 
‘“ouardians of my door and for the ordering of my 
“territory. Let me be sound and strong, let me have 


Chap. liii. 4] OF AVOIDING UNCLEAN FOOD 195 


“a large room, and let me be able to sit wheresoever 


“‘T please.” 
p 


CHAPTER LIIT. 
[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 11). ] 


Vignette: This Chapter is without a vignette in the Theban 

Recension; in the Turin Papyrus (Lepsius, op. c7t., Bl. 22) the 

deceased is seated on a chair with a table of offerings before 

him, and his left hand, with a bowl therein, is stretched out 
over it. See the vignette to Chapter LIT. 


Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF NOT EATING FILTH 
AND OF NOT DRINKING FOUL WATER IN THE UNDER- 
WORLD. ‘The overseer of the house of the overseer of 
the seal, Nu, triumphant, saith :— 


“T am the Bull with two horns, and [I] lead (2) along 
“the heavens. [I am] the lord of the risings of the 
“heavens, the Great [luminer who cometh forth out of 
“flame, the bestower of years, the far extending One, 
“the double Lion-god, and there hath been given to 
“me (3) the journey of the god of splendour (Khu). 
“That which is an abomination unto me, that which is 
‘an abomination unto me, let me not eat. [Let me not 
eat] filth, and let me not drink foul water, and let me 
“not be tripped up and fall [in the underworld]. (4) I 


1 Var., Shu. 


196 OF AVOIDING UNCLEAN FOOD (Chap. iii, 


“am the lord of cakes in Annu, and my bread is in 
“heaven with Ra, and my cakes are on the earth with 
“the god Seb, for the Sektet boat and the Afet boat 
“have (5) brought them to me from the house of the 
“oreat god who isin Annu. I have put away from me 
‘“‘my associates, and I have united myself to the boat of 
“heaven. I eat of what they (i.e., the gods, or the 
‘divine boatmen) eat there; I live upon what (6) they 
“Jive upon there; and I eat of the cakes which are in 
“the hall of the lord of sepulchral offerings, I the over- 
“seer of the house of the overseer of the seal, Nu, 
“triumphant.” ! 


1 In the Leyden Papyrus of Ra the Chapter ends :—‘“‘ triumphant 
before the great god, the lord of Amentet, and before Anpu”; 
in the Turin Papyrus (Lepsius, op. cit., Bl. 22) it ends with the 
words :—‘‘ Filth is an abomination unto me, and I will not eat it.” 


Chap. liv.] OF OBTAINING AIR 197 


CHAPTER LIV. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 12).] 


Vignette : The deceased arrayed in white and holding a sail, 
symbolic of air, in his left hand (see Papyrus of Ani, sheet 15). 


Text: (1) THE CHAPTER OF GIVING AIR (2) TO THE 
OVERSEER OF THE HOUSE OF THE OVERSEER OF THE SEAL, 
Nv, TRIUMPHANT, IN THE UNDERWORLD. He saith :— 


“Hail, thou god Temu, grant unto me the sweet 
“breath which dwelleth in thy nostrils! Iam the Egg 
“(3) which is in Kenkenur (7.e., the Great Cackler), 
“and I watch and guard that mighty thing which hath 
“eome into being and with which the god Seb hath 
“opened the earth. I live; and it liveth; (4) I become 
“old, I live, and I snuff the air. I am the god Utcha- 


198 OF OBTAINING AIR [Chap. liv. 5 


“aabet (7.e., the god who trieth hostility), and I revolve 
“behind [to protect] his egg. I shine at the moment 
(5) of Horus, the mighty god Suti, whose strength is 
“two-fold. Hail, thou who makest sweet the seasons 
“of the two earths, thou dweller among celestial food, 
“thou dweller in the cerulean heights of heaven,' keep 
“watch over the Babe that dwelleth in his (6) cot when 
“he cometh forth to you.” 


CHAPTER LY. 


{From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 12). ] 


Vignette : The deceased holding a sail in each hand (see 
Naville, op. cit., Bd. I. BL 67). 


Text: (1) THE CHAPTER OF GIVING AIR IN THE 
UNDERWORLD. Saith Nu, triumphant :—(2) 


“Tam the Jackal of jackals, I am Shu, and [1] draw 
“air from the presence of the god of Light [ Khu] to the 
“bounds of heaven, and to the bounds of (8) earth, and 


! Literally, ‘‘ Dweller in lapis-lazuli.” 


Chap. lvi. 4] OF SNUFFING THE AIR 199 


“to the bounds of the uttermost limits of the flight 
“ (literally feather) of the Nebeh bird. May air be given 
“unto these young divine beings.” ! 


CHAPTER LYI. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 12).] 


Vignette : The deceased holding in his hand a sail, symbolic 
of air. 

Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF SNUFFING THE AIR 
AMONG THE WATERS IN THE UNDERWORLD. The over- 
seer of the house (2) of the overseer of the seal, Nu, 
triumphant, saith :-— 

“Hail, thou god Tem, grant thou unto me the sweet 
“breath which dwelleth in thy nostrils. I embrace 
“that great throne (3) which is in the city of Hermo- 
“polis, and I keep watch over the Egg of Kenken-ur 
“(i.c., Great Cackler) ; I germinate as it germinateth ; 
 “ (4) T live as it liveth ; and[my] breath is [its] breath.” 


! A Papyrus at Leyden (see Naville, op. cit., Bd. IL. p. 125) adds: 
‘*My mouth is open, and I see with my two eyes.” 


200 . OF SNUFFING THE AIR (Chap. lvii. x 


CHAPTER LVII. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 12). ] 


Hireaend 


Vignette : The deceased standing in a stream of water, and 
holding a sail in his left hand (see Naville, op. e7t., Bd. I. Bl. 70). 


Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF SNUFFING THE AIR 
AND OF HAVING THE MASTERY OVER THE WATER IN 
THE UNDERWORLD. The overseer of the house of the 
overseer of the seal, Nu, triumphant, saith :—(2) 

“Hail, Hap-ur,' god of heaven, in thy name of 
“* Divider of heaven,’ grant thou unto me that I may 
‘have dominion over (3) the water, even as the goddess 
‘““Sekhet had power over Osiris on the night of the 
“storms and floods. Grant thou that I may have 
‘power over the divine princes who have their habita- 
“tions in the place of (4) the god of the inundation, 
“even as they have power over their own holy god of 


' Te., the ‘Great Ilapi,”. or the celestial Nile. 


Chap. lvii, 8] OF SNUFFING THE AIR 201 


“whose name they are ignorant; and may they let me 
“have power even as [he hath let them have power].” 

“My nostrils are (5) opened in Tattu,” or (as others 
say), “My mouth and my nostrils are opened in 
“atau, and I have my place of peace in Annu, which 
“is my house; it was built for me by the (6) goddess 
“ Sesheta,! and the god Khnemu set it up for me upon 
“ats walls. Ifto this heaven it cometh by the north, I 
“sit at the south; if to this heaven (7) it cometh by 
“the south, I sit at the north; if to this heaven it 
“cometh by the west, I sit at the east; andif to this 
“heaven it cometh by the east, (8) I sit at the west. I 
“draw the air of my nostrils, and I make my way into 
“every place in which I wish to sit.” 


In the Papyrus of Nefer-uben-f (see Naville, op. cit., 
Bd. I. Bl. 70) this Chapter ends quite differently, and 
reads :— 


“Tam strong in my mouth and in my nostrils, for 
“behold Tem has stablished them ; behold, O ye gods 
“and Khus. Rest thou, then, O Tem. Behold the 
“staff which blossometh, and which cometh forth when 
“a man erieth out in your names. Behold, I am Tem, 
“the tree (?) of the gods in [their] visible forms. Let 
“me not be turned back....I am the Am-khent, 
“Nefer-uben-f, triumphant. Let neither my flesh nor 


! A goddess whose name was formerly read Sefek-aabui. She 
was a form of Hathor, and was the goddess of writing and of books; 
her worship goes back to the earliest dynasties. 


202 OF BREATHING THE AIR (Chap. lvii. © 


‘““my members be gashed with knives, let me not be 
“wounded by knives by you. I have come, I have 
“been judged, I have come forth therein, [I] have 
“power with my father, the Old Man, Nu. He hath 
‘“oranted that I may live, he hath given strength unto 
‘““me, and he hath provided me with the inheritance of 


“my father therein.” 


CHAPTER LVIII. 


[From the Papyrus of Ani (Brit. Mus. No. 10,470, sheet 16). ] 


LOO 


. 
$] y 33) 
ROA 


Vignette: Ani and his wife Thuthu standing in a pool of 

running water; each holds a sail, the symbol of air, in the left 

hand, and scoops up water to the mouth with the right hand. 

On the edges of the pool are palm trees, from the largest of 
which hang great clusters of dates. 


Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF BREATHING THE AIR 


Chap. lviii.] OF BREATHING THE AIR 203 


AND OF HAVING DOMINION OVER THE WATER IN THE 
UNDERWORLD. Osiris Ani saith :— 


“Open to me.” Who art thou? Whither goest 
thou? (2) What is thy name? “Tam one of you.”? 
Who are those with thee? ‘“ The two serpent goddesses 
‘““ Merti. Separate thou from him, head from head, 
“when (3) [thou] goest into the divine Mesqen chamber. 
“He letteth me set out for the temple of the gods 
“who have found their faces. ‘Assembler of Souls’ 
““(4) is the name of my boat; ‘Making the hair to 
“stand on end’ is the name of the oars; ‘Goad’ is the 
“name of the (5) hold(?); ‘Making straight for the 
“middle’ is the name of the rudder; likewise [the 
boat] is a type of my being borne onward (6) in the 
“pool. Let there be given unto me vessels of milk, 
“together with cakes, and loaves of bread, and cups of 
“drink, and flesh (7) in the Temple of Anpu.” 


RUBRIC: If he (i.e., the deceased) knoweth this chapter, he 
shall go into, after coming forth from, the underworld of the 
[beautiful Amentet ]. 


1 I.e., Isis and Nephthys. 


204 OF SNUFFING THE AIR [ Chap. lix. 


CHAPTER LIX. 


[From the Papyrus of Ani (Brit. Mus. No. 10,470, sheet 16). ] 


Vignette : Ani kneeling beside a pool of water, wherein grows 

a sycamore tree; in the tree appears the goddess Nut pouring 

out water for him from a vessel with the left hand, and giving 
him cakes with the right. 


Text: (1) THE CHAPTER OF SNUFFING THE AIR, 
AND OF HAVING DOMINION OVER THE WATER IN THE 
UNDERWORLD. Osiris Ani saith :— 


“Hail, thou sycamore tree of the goddess Nut! 
“Grant thou to me of [the water and of] the (2) air 
“which dwell in thee. I embrace the throne which is 
“in Unnu (Hermopolis), and I watch and guard (3) the 
“ Heo of Nekek-ur (7.e., the Great Cackler). It groweth, 
“T crow; it liveth, I live; (4) it snuffeth the air, I 
‘snuff the air, I the Osiris Ani, in triumph.” 


Chap. Ix. ] OF SNUFFING THE AIR 205 


CHAPTER LX. 


[From Lepsius, Todtenbuch, Bl. 23. } 


Vignette: The deceased holding in his left hand a lotus 
flower. In the Turin Papyrus the deceased holds a. sail, 


symbolic of air. 
. 


Text: (1) Anoruer Cuarrer. Osiris Auf-inkh, 
triumphant, saith :— 

“Let the gates of heaven be opened for me by the 
“ood [Thoth] and by Hapi, and let me pass through 
“the doors of Ta-qebh' into the great heaven,” or (as 
others say), “at the time,” (2) [or (as others say)], 
“with the strength (?) of Ra. Grant ye, [O Thoth and 
“Flapi,| that I may have power over the water, even as 
“Set had power over (3) his enemies on the day when 
“there were storms and rain upon the earth. Let me 
“have power over the divine beings who have (4) 
“mighty arms in their shoulders, even as the god who 


' T.e., the ‘land of cold and refreshing water.” 


206 OF GUARDING THE SOUL [Chap. Ixi. 


“ds apparelled in splendour and whose name is unknown 
‘had power over them; and may I have power over 
“the beings whose arms are mighty.” 


CHAPTER LXI. 


{From the Papyrus of Ani (Brit. Mus. No. 10,470, sheet 15). ] 


Vignette: The scribe Ani, clothed in white, clasping to his 
breast his soul, which is in the form of a human-headed hawk. 


Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF NOT LETTING THE 
SOUL OF A MAN BE TAKEN FROM HIM IN THE UNDER- 
WORLD. Osiris, the scribe, Ani, saith :— 

“T, even I, am he (2) who came forth from the water- 
“flood which I make to overflow, and which becometh 
“mighty as the river | Nile].” 


Chap. Ixii. | OF DRINKING WATER 207 


CHAPTER LXIL. 


[From the Papyrus of Nebseni (Brit. Mus. No. 9900, sheet 4). ] 


Vignette : The deceased scooping up running water out of a 
stream into his mouth with both hands. 


Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF DRINKING WATER IN 
THE UNDERWORLD. (2) The scribe Nebseni........ 
saith -— (3) 

“May be opened [to me] the mighty flood by Osiris, 
‘and may the abyss of water be opened [to me] by 
“Tehuti-Hapi, (4) the lord of the horizon, in my name 
“of ‘Opener.’ May there be granted [to me] mastery 
“over the water-courses as over the members (5) of Set. 
“T go forth into heaven. I am the Lion-god Ra. I 
“am the Bull. (6) [I] have eaten the thigh, and I 
“have divided the carcase. I have gone round about 
“among the islands (or lakes) of Sekhet-(7)Aaru.' 
“Indefinite time, without beginning and without end, 
“hath been given to me; I inherit eternity, and ever- 
“Jastingness hath been bestowed upon me.” 


1 T.e., a portion of the Elysian Fields (see Chapter CX.). 


208 OF DRINKING WATER [Chap. Ixiii.a. 


The last three Chapters, with a single vignette, are 
grouped in one in the Papyrus of Nefer-uben-f (see 
Naville, op. cit., Bd. I. Bl. 72); but the order of 
them, as there given is 61, 60, 62. In the Turin 
Papyrus (Lepsius, op. cit., B]. 23) the vignette of each 
is the same, 7.e., the deceased holding a sail in his left 
hand. 


CHAPTER LXIILa. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 7). ] 


Vignette: The deceased drinking water from a running 

stream, or the deceased kneeling by the side of a pool of water 

and receiving water in a bowl, which he holds in his right hand, 

from a vessel which the goddess of the sycamore tree (Hathor) 

is emptying into it. In the Turin Papyrus (Lepsius, op. cit., 

Bl. 23) the deceased is pouring out water from two vessels 
before the symbol of flame, 


Text: (1) THE CHAPTER OF DRINKING WATER AND 
OF NOT BEING BURNT (2) BY FIRE [IN THE UNDER- 


Chap, Ixiii.a, 5] OF NOT BEING BURNT 209 


WORLD. ‘The overseer of the house of the overseer of 
the seal, Nu, triumphant, saith :— 


“Hail, Bull of Amentet! I am brought unto thee, 
“Tam the oar of Ra (3) wherewith he ferried over the 
“divine aged ones; let me neither be burnt up nor 
“destroyed by fire. I am Bet,' the first-born son of 
“ Osiris, who doth meet every god (4) within the temple 
“of his Eye in Annu. I am the divine Heir, the 
“exalted one (?), the Mighty One, the Resting One. I 
“have made my name to germinate, (5) I have delivered 
“it|, and thou shalt live through me day by day.” 


CHAPTER LXIIIz. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 12). ] 


Vignette; The deceased standing before two symbols of fire, 
or the deceased sitting before a table of offerings and smelling 
a flower (Naville, op. cit., Bd. I. Bl. 74). 

! A better reading is Beb, J J }. 

VOL, I. P 


210 OF NOT BEING SCALDED (Chap. Ixiii.e, 


Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF NOT BEING SCALDED 
WITH WATER. The overseer of the palace, the overseer 
of the house of the overseer of the seal, Nu, triumphant, 
saith:— 

“T am the oar made ready for rowing, (2) where- 
“with Ra transported the boat containing the divine 
‘ancestors, and lifted up the moist emanations of Osiris 
“from the Lake of Fire, (3) and he was not burned. I 
“lie down like a divine Spirit, [and like] Khnemu who 
‘“‘dwelleth among lions. Come, break away (4) the 
‘“yestraints from him that passeth by the side of this 
“path, and let me come forth by it.” 


CHAPTER = LXIV. 


The LX1Vth Chapter is probably one of the oldest 
of all in the Book of the Dead, and two versions of it 
seem to have existed in the earliest times. ‘The longer 
version is called the “ Chapter of coming forth by day 
in the underworld,” and the shorter the “ Chapter of 
knowing the ‘Chapters of coming forth by day’ in a 
single Chapter.” On a coffin of the XIth dynasty both 
versions occur. The rubric of one version says that it 
was discovered in the reign of [lesep-ti, 7.e., about B.C. 
4266, while the rubric of the other attributes its 
discovery to the time of Menthu-hetep, which is clearly 


Chap, Ixiv. 4] OF COMING FORTH BY DAY 211 


a mistake for Men-kau-Ra (Mycerinus). Thus in the 
XIth dynasty it was believed that the Chapter might 
even be as ancient as the time of the Ist dynasty. 
There is little doubt that the Chapter was looked upon 
as an abridgment of all the “ Chapters of coming forth 


by day,” and that it had a value which was equivalent 
to them all. 


[From the Papyrus of Nebseni (Brit. Mus. No. 9900, sheets 23 
and 24). | 


Vignette : The deceased adoring the sun's disk, which rises 
above the top of a tree. 


Text: (1) Tue CHAPTER OF COMING FORTH BY 
DAY IN THE UNDERWORLD. Nebseni, the lord ot 
reverence, saith :— (2) 


“T am Yesterday, To-day, and To-morrow, [and I 
“ have] the power (3) to be born a second time ; [I am] 
“the divine hidden Soul who createth the gods, and 
“who giveth celestial meals unto. the denizens of the 
“Tuat (underworld), Amentet, and heaven. [I am] the 
“Rudder (4) of the Hast, the Possessor of two Divine 


212 OF COMING FORTH BY DAY [ Chap. lxiv. 4 


‘Faces wherein his beams are seen. I am the Lord of 
“the men who are raised up; [the Lord] who cometh 
“forth from out of the darkness, and (5) whose forms 
‘of existence are of the house wherein are the dead. 
‘Hail, ye two Hawks who are perched upon your rest- 
‘““ing-places, who hearken unto (6) the things which are 
‘said by him, who guide the bier to the hidden place, 
‘who lead along Ra, and (7) who follow [him] into the 
“uppermost place of the shrine which is in the celestial 
“heights! [Hail,] Lord of the Shrine which standeth 
“in the middle of the earth. (8) He is I, and I am 
“he, and Ptah hath covered his sky with crystal. 
“!Hail] Ra, thou who art content, thy heart (9) is 
“olad by reason of thy beautiful law of the day; thou 
‘‘enterest in by Khemennu (?) and comest forth at the 
“east, and the divine (10) first-born beings who are in 
‘“lthy] presence cry out with gladness [unto thee]. 
‘Make thou thy roads glad for me, and make broad for 
“me thy paths (11) when I shall set out from earth for 
“the life in the celestial regions. Send forth thy light 
“upon me, O Soul unknown, for I am [one] of those 
‘who are about to enter in, and the divine speech is in 
(12) [my] ears in the Tuat (underworld), and let no 
‘defects of my mother be [imputed] unto me; let me 
“be delivered and let me be safe from (13) him whose 
“divine eyes sleep at eventide, when [he] gathereth 
“together and finisheth [the day] in night. I flood 
“(the land] with water and ‘Qem-ur’! is (14) my name 


1 A name of Osiris. 


Chap. Ixiv. 23] OF COMING FORTH BY DAY 213 


“and the garment wherewith I am.clothed is complete. 
“ Fail, thou divine prince Ati-she-f,! ery out unto those 
“divine beings who dwell in their hair at the (15) 
“season when the god is [lifted upon] the shoulder, 
“saying: ‘Come thou who [dwellest] above thy divine 
‘abyss of water, for verily (16) the thigh [of the saeri- 
fice] is tied to the neck, and the buttocks are [laid] 
“upon the head of Amentet.’ May the Ur-urti? god- 
“ desses grant [such] gifts unto me when my tears start 
‘from me as I see myself (17) journeying at the divine 
“festival of Tena in Abydos, and the wooden fastenings 
“which fasten the four doors above thee are in thy 
“power (18) within thy garment. Thy face is like that 
“ofa greyhound which scenteth with his nose the place 
“whither I go on my feet. The god (19) Akau ® tran- 
‘“sporteth me to the chamber (?), and [my] nurse is the 
‘divine double Lion-god himself. I am made strong 
“and I (20) come forth like him that forceth a way 
“through the gate, and the radiance which my heart 
“hath made is enduring; ‘I know the abysses’ is thy 
“name. I work for you, (21) O ye Spirits—four millions, 
“six hundred thousand, one thousand and two hundred 
“are they—concerning the things which are there. [I 
‘“am|] over their affairs working (22) for hours and days 
“in setting straight the shoulders of the twelve Sah 
“gods, (23) and joining the hands of their company, 
“each to each; the sixth who is at the head of the 


1 T.e., the ‘‘ Boundless.” 2 T.e., Isis and Nephthys. 
3 A name of Anubis, 


214 OF COMING FORTH BY DAY [Chap. Ixiv. 24 


‘abyss is the hour of the defeat of the Fiends. {I] 
“have come (24) there in triumph, and [I am] he who 
“is in the halls (or courtyards) of the underworld, and 
“T am he who is laid under tribute to (25) Shu. I rise 
“as the Lord of Life through the beautiful law of this 
“day, and it is their blood and the cool water of | their] 
“slaughter (26) which make the union of the earth to 
“blossom. I make a way among the horns of all those 
“who make themselves strong against me, and [among| 
“those who in secret (27) make themselves adversaries 
“unto me, and who are upon their bellies. I have 
‘come as the envoy of my Lord (28) of lords to give 
“counsel [concerning] Osiris; the eye shall not absorb! 
“its tears. I am the divine envoy (?) of (29) the house 
“of him that dwelleth in his possessions, and I have 
“eome from Sekhem to Annu? to make known to the 
‘ Bennu bird therein concerning the events of (30) the 
“Tuat (underworld). Hail, thou Aukert, (i.e., under- 
“ world) which hidest thy companion who is in thee, 
“thou creator of forms of existence like the god 
“ Khepera, grant thou that (31) Nebseni, the seribe and 
“designer to the temples of the South and of the North, 
“may come forth (82) to see the Disk, and that his 
‘“journeyings forth (?) may be in the presence of the 
“oreat god, that is to say, Shu, who dwelleth in ever- 
“lastingness. Let me journey on in peace; (33) let 


1 Literally, ‘‘ eat.” 
2 T.e., I have come from Letopolis to Heliopolis; the Bennw bird 
in the latter city is, of course, Osiris (See Chapter XVIT., line 25). 


Chap. Ixiv. 41] OF COMING FORTH BY DAY 215 


“me pass over the sky; let me adore the radiance of 
“the splendour [which is in] my sight ; let me soar like 
“a bird to see (54) the companies (?) of the Spirits in 
“the presence of Ra day by day, who vivifieth every 
“human being (35) that walketh upon the regions 
“which are upon the earth. Hail, Hemti (7.c., Runner), 
“hail, Hemti, who carriest away the shades of the 
“dead (36) and the Spirits from earth, grant thou unto 
“me a prosperous way to the Tuat (underworld), such 
“as is made for the favoured ones [of the god], 
“because (37) [I am] helpless to gather together the 
“emanations which come from me. Who art thou, 
“then, who consumest in its hidden place? (58) I am 
“the Chief in Re-stau, and ‘He that goeth in in his 
“own name and cometh forth in that of Hehi(?), the 
“Jord of millions of years, and of the earth, is my 
“name, The pregnant goddess hath (39) deposited 
“[upon the earth] her load, and hath given birth to 
“Fit straightway;~the closed door which is by the 
“wall is overthrown, (40) it is turned upside down and 
“T rejoice thereat. ‘To the Mighty One hath his eye 
“been given, and it sendeth forth light from his face 
“when the earth becometh light (or at day-break). I 
“shall not become corrupt (41), but I shall come into 
“being in the form of the Lion-god and like the 
“blossoms of Shu ;' I am the being who is never over- 
‘‘whelmed in the waters. Happy, yea happy is he that 


! The blossoms of Shu are the sun’s rays. 


216 OF COMING FORTH BY DAY [Chap. Ixiv. 42 


“looked upon the funeral couch which hath come to its 
“place of rest, upon the happy day (42) of the god 
“whose heart resteth, who maketh his place of alight- 
“ine [thereon]. I am he who cometh forth by day; 
“the lord of the bier which giveth life in the presence 
“of Osiris. (43) In very truth the things which are 
“thine are stable each day, O scribe, artist, child of the 
“ Seshet chamber, Nebseni, lord of veneration. I clasp 
“the Sycamore tree, (44) I myself am joined unto the 
“Sycamore tree, and its.arm[s] are opened unto me 
‘“‘oraciously. I have come and I have clasped the 
“ Utchat,' (45) and I have caused it to be seated in peace 
“upon its throne. I have come to see Ra when he 
“setteth, and I absorb into myself the winds [which 
arise] (46) when he cometh forth, and both my hands 
“are clean to adore him. I have gathered together 
“Tall my members], I have gathered together [all 
‘“‘my members|. I soar like a bird (47) and I descend 
“upon the earth, and mine eye maketh me to walk 
“thereon in my footsteps. I am the child of yesterday, 
“and the Akeru® (48) gods of the earth have made me 
“to come into being, and they have made me strong for 
‘my moment [of coming forth]. I hide with the god 
‘“ Aha-aaiu® who will walk (49) behind me, and my 
‘‘members shall germinate, and my khw shall be as an 
‘amulet for my body and as one who watcheth [to pro- 
' T.e., the Eye of Ra or Horus which was attacked by Set. 


2 T.e., the two lion-gods who watch, one at each end, the path 
of the night sun. 


3 T.e., “he who fights with both hands.” 


Ch, lxiv. Rubric] OF COMING FORTH BY DAY 217 


“tect | my soul (50) and to defend it and to converse 
“therewith ; and the company of the gods shall hearken 
“unto my words.” 


RUBRIC: If this chapter be known [by the deceased] he 
shall be victorious both upon earth and in (51) the underworld. 
He shall do whatsoever a man doeth who is upon the earth, 
and he shall perform all the deeds which those do who are 
[alive]. Nowit is a great protection [given] by the god. This 
chapter was found (52) in the city of Khemennu inscribed in 
letters of lapis-lazuli upon the block of iron which was under 
the feet of this god. 


In the Rubric to this Chapter as found in the Papyrus 
of Mes-em-neter, the Chapter is said to have been “ dis- 
“covered in the foundations of the shrine of the divine 
“ Hennu! boat by the chief mason in the time of the 
“king of the North and of the South, Semti (or 
‘‘Tlesepti*), triumphant,” and it is there directed that 
it “shall be recited by one who is ceremonially pure 
“and clean, and who hath not touched women, and who 
“hath not eaten flesh of animals or fish.” 


' See the note to Chapter I., p. 43. 
2 A king of the Ist dynasty. See also the rubric to the longer 
version of the 64th from the Papyrus of Nu, infra, p. 221. 


i) 
H 
(oe) 


OF COMING FORTH BY DAY [Chap. Ixiv. 1 


CHAPTER LXIV. (Snort VERsion). 
[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 13). ] 
Vignette : In the Papyrus of Nu this Chapter has no vignette. 


Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF KNOWING THE ‘ CHAP- 
TERS OF COMING FORTH BY DAY” IN A (2) SINGLE 
Cuaptrern. The overseer of the house of the overseer of 
the seal, Osiris Nu, triumphant, begotten of the over- 
seer of the house, Amen-hetep, triumphant, saith :— 


“Tam Yesterday and To-day; and I have the power 
“to be born a second time. [I am] the divine hidden 
(3) Soul, who createth the gods, and who giveth 
“celestial meals to the divine hidden beings [in the 
“Tuat (underworld) |, in Amenti, and in heaven. [I am|] 
“the Rudder of the East, the Possessor of two Divine 
“Faces wherein his beams are seen. (4) I am the 
“Lord of those who are raised up from the dead, [the 
“TLord| who cometh forth from out of the darkness. 
‘“|Hail,| ye two divine Hawks who are perched upon 
“your resting-places, and who hearken unto the (5) 
‘things which are said by him, the thigh [of the sacri- 
‘fice |1is tied to the neck, and the buttocks [are laid] upon 
“the head of Amentet. May the Ur-urti! (6) goddesses 
“grant such gifts unto me when my tears start from me 


! T.e., Isis and Nephthys. 


Chap. Ixiv, 13] OF COMING FORTH BY DAY 219 


“as IT look on. ‘I know the abysses’ is thyname. [1] 
“work for [you], O ye (7) Spirits, who are in number 
“lfour] millions, [six] hundred and one thousand, and 
“two hundred, and they are |in height] twelve cubits. 
“1Ye] travel on joining the hands, each to each, but 
“the sixth [hour], (8) which belongeth at the head of 
“the Tuat (underworld), is the hour of the overthrow 
“of the Fiend. [I] have come there in triumph, and 
“![am] he who is in the hall (or courtyard) of the 
“Tuat; (9) and the seven (?) come in his manifesta- 
“tions. The strength which protecteth me is that 
“which hath my Spirit under its protection, [that is] 
“the blood, and the cool water, and the slaughterings 
“which abound (?). I open [a way among] (10) the 
“horns of all those who would do harm unto me, who 
“keep themselves hidden, who make themselves adver- 
‘“‘saries unto me, and those who are upon (11) their 
“bellies. The Eye shall not eat (or absorb) the tears 
“of the goddess Aukert.! Hail, goddess Aukert, open 
“thou unto me the enclosed place, and (12) grant thou 
“unto me pleasant roads whereupon I may travel. 
“Who art thou, then, who consumest in the hidden 
“places? Iam the chief in Re-stau, and [I] go in and 
“come forth (13) in my name of ‘Hehi, the lord of 
“millions of years [and of] the earth’; [I am] the 
“maker of my name. The pregnant one hath deposited 
“Tupon the earth] her load. The door by the wall is 


! A name of the underworld. 


\ 


220 OF COMING FORTH BY DAY [Chap. Ixiv. 14 


“shut fast, and the (14) things of terror are overturned 
“and thrown down upon the backbone (?) of the Bennw! 
“bird by the two Samait goddesses.” To the Mighty 
“One hath his Eye been given, and his face emitteth 
“light when [he] (15) illumineth the earth, [my name 
“is his name}.* I shall not become corrupt, but I 
“shall come into being in the form of the Lion-god ; 
“the blossoms of Shu‘ shall be in me. I am he who 
“Gs never overwhelmed in the waters. Happy, yea 
“happy, 1s the funeral couch of the (16) Still-heart ; he 
‘maketh himself to alight upon the pool (?), and verily 
‘he cometh forth [therefrom]. I am the lord of my 
“life. I have come to this [place], and I have come 
“forth from Re-aa-urt (17) the city of Osiris. Verily 
“the things which are thine are with the Suriw deities. 
“T have clasped the Sycamore tree and I have divided (?) 
“it (18); Ihave opened a way for myself [among] the 
“Sekhia gods of the Tuat. I have come to see him 
“that dwelleth in his divine uraeus, face to face and 
“eye to (19) eye, and [I] draw to myself the winds 
“Twhich rise] when he cometh forth. My two eyes (?) 
“are weak in my face, O Lion|-god], Babe, who dwellest 
“in Utent. (20) Thou art in me and I am in thee; 
‘‘and thy attributes are my attributes. I am the god 
“of the Inundation (Bah), and ‘Qem-ur-she’ (21) is 
_“my. name. My forms are the forms of the god 


A ee.4 Osiris: * T.e., Isis and Nephthys. 
5 These words are added from the Papyrus of Nebseni. 
4 T.e., the beams of the Sun-god. 


Ch, Ixiv. Rubrics] OF COMING FORTH BY DAY 221 


“Khepera, the hair of the earth of Tem, the hair of the 
“earth of Tem. (22) I have entered in as a man of no 
“understanding, and I shall come forth in the form of 
“a strong Spirit, and I shall look upon my form which 
“shall be that of men and women for ever and for ever.” 


RUBRIC!: I, [If this chapter be known] by a man he shall 
come forth by day, (23) and he shall not be repulsed at any 
gate of the Tuat (underworld), either in going in or in coming 
out. He shall perform [all] the transformations which his 
heart shall desire for him and he shall not die; (24) behold, the 
soul of [this] man shall flourish. And moreover, if [he] know 
this chapter he shall be victorious upon earth and in the 
underworld, and he shall perform every act of a living (25) 
human being. Now it is a great protection which [hath been 
given] by the god. This chapter was found in the foundations 
of the shrine of Hennu? by the chief mason during the reign of 
His Majesty, the King of the North and of the South, Semti 
(or Hesepti*), triumphant, who carried [it ] away as a mysterious 
object which had never [before] been seen or looked upon. 
This chapter shall be recited by a man who is ceremonially 
clean and pure, who hath not eaten the flesh of animals or 
fish, and who hath not had intercourse with women. 


RUBRIC?: II. (1) If.this chapter be known [ by the deceased } 
he shall be victorious both upon earth and in the underworld, 
and he shall perform every act of a living human (2) being. 
Now it is a great protection which [hath been given] by the 
god. 

This chapter was found in the city of Khemennu upon a 
block of iron of the south, which had been inlaid [with letters] 
(3) of real lapis-lazuli, under the feet of the god during the 
reign of His Majesty, the King of the North and of the South, 
Men-kau-Ra (Mycerinus), triumphant,® by the royal son 


1 From the Papyrus of Nu, sheet 13. 

2 A name of Osiris. 3 See above, p. 210. 
4 From the Papyrus of Nu, sheet 21. 

® The builder of the third pyramid at Gizeh. 


222 OF COMING FORTH BY DAY [Ch,Ixiv, Rubrics 


Heru-ta-ta-f,| triumphant; he found it (4) when he was 
journeying about to make an inspection of the temples. One 
Nekht (?) was with him who was diligent in making him to 
understand (?) it, and he brought it (5) to the king as a 
wonderful object when he saw that it was a thing of great 
mystery, which had never [before] been seen or looked upon. 

This chapter (6) shall be recited by a man who is ceremonially 
clean and pure, who hath not eaten the flesh of animals or fish, 
and who hath not had intercourse with women. And behold, 
thou shalt make a scarab of green stone, with (7) a rim 
plated (?) with gold, which shall be placed in the heart of a 
man, and it shall perform for him the ‘‘ opening of the mouth.” 
And thou shalt anoint it with anti unguent, and thou shalt 
recite over it [these] enchantments :— 4 


! He was the son of Cheops, the builder of the Great Pyramid at 
Gizeh. 

2 See Chapter XXIII. 

3 Here follows the text of Chapter XXXB. (see p. 149). 


END OF VOL. I. 


LONDON: 
PRINTED BY GILBERT AND RIVINGTON, LIMITED, 
ST, JOUN’S HOUSE, CLERKENWELL, E.C. 


Catalogue of Publications 


of the 


Open Court Publishing Company 


Chicago, Monon Building, 324 Dearborn St. 


London, Kegan Paul, Trench, Triibner & Co, 


SUNDARA ROW, T. 
GEOMETRICAL EXERCISES IN PAPER-FOLDING. 
With Half-Tones from Photographs of Exercises. Pages, x + 148. 
Cloth, $1.00 net (4s. 6d. net). 


COPE.E.D: 
THE PRIMARY FACTORS OF ORGANIC EVOLUTION, 
1z1cuts. Pp. xvi, 547. Cloth, $2.00 (10s.), 


MULLER, F. MAX. 
THREE INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON THE SCIENCE OF 
THOUGHT. 
128 pages. Cloth, 75c (3s. 6d.). 


THREE LECTURES ON THE SCIENCE OF LANGUAGE, 
112 pages. 2nd Edition. Cloth, 75c (3s. 6d.). 


ROMANES, GEORGE JOHN. 
DARWIN AND AFTER DARWIN. 
Three Vols., $4.00. Singly, as follows: 
1, THE DARWINIAN THEORY. 460 pages. 125 illustrations. Cloth, $2.00. 
2. Post-DaRWINIAN Questions. Heredity and Utility. Pp. 338. $1.50. 
3. Post-DaRWINIAN Questions. Isolation and Physiological Selection. 
Pp. 181. $1.00. 


AN EXAMINATION OF WEISMANNISM. 
236 pages. Cloth, $1.00, 


THOUGHTS ON RELIGION. 
Third Edition, Pages, 184. Cloth, gilt top, $1.25. 


SHUTE, DR. D. KERFOOT. 
FIRST BOOK IN ORGANIC EVOLUTION. 
g colored plates, 39 cuts. Pp. xvi+285. Price, $2.00 (7s. 6d.). 


MACH, ERNST. 
THE SCIENCE OF MECHANICS. 
fhe 4 VY T. J. McCormack. 2nded. 250cuts. 540 pages. $1.75 net 
(7s. 6d.). 


POPULAR SCIENTIFIC LECTURES. 
Third Edition. 415 pages. 59 cuts. Cloth, gilt top. $1.50 (7s. 6d.). 


THE ANALYSIS OF THE SENSATIONS. 
Pp. 208. 37 cuts, Cloth, $1.25 (6s. 6d.). 


LAGRANGE, JOSEPH LOUIS. 
LECTURES ON ELEMENTARY MATHEMATICS. 
With portrait of the author. Pp. 172. Price, $1 00 (5s.). 


DE MORGAN, AUGUSTUS. 
ON THE STUDY AND DIFFICULTIES OF MATHEMATICS. 
New Reprint edition with notes. Pp. viii+288. Cloth, $1.25 (5s.). 


ELEMENTARY ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE DIFFERENTIAL AND 
INTEGRAL CALCULUS. 
New reprint edition, Price, $1.00 (5s.). 


FINK, KARL. 
A BRIEF HISTORY OF MATHEMATICS. 
Trans. by W. W. Beman and D. E, Smith. Pp., 333. Cloth, $1.50 (5s.6d.). 


SCHUBERT, HERMANN. 
MATHEMATICAL ESSAYS AND RECREATIONS. 
Pp. 149. Cuts, 37. Cloth, 75c (3s. 6d.). 


HUC AND GABET, MM. 
TRAVELS IN TARTAR\, THIBET AND CHINA, 
roo engravings. Pp 28+ 660. 2 vols. $2.00 (1os.). One vol., $1.25 (5s.). 


CARUS, PAUL. 
THE HISTORY OF THE DEVIL, AND THE IDEA OF EVIL. 
311 Illustrations. Pages, 500. Price, $6.00 (30s.). 
THE CROWN OF THORNS. 
A Story of the Time of Christ. Illustrated. Pages, 73. Cloth, 75c 
net (3s, 6d, net), 
EROS AND PSYCHE. 
After Apuleius. Illustrations by Paul Thumann. Pp. 125, Cl., $1.50 (6s.). 
WHENCE AND WHITHER? 
An Inquiry into the Nature of the Soul. 196 pages. Cloth, 75c (3s. 6d.). 
THE ETHICAL PROBLEM. 
Second edition, revised and enlarged. 351 pages. Cloth, $1.25 (6s. 6d.) 
FUNDAMENTAL PROBLEMS. 
Second edition, revised and enlarged. 372 pp. hs $1.50 (7s. 6d.). 
HOMILIES OF SCIENCE. 
317 pages. Cloth, Gilt Top, $1.50 (7s. 6d.), 
THE IDEA OF GOD. 
Fourth edition. 32 pages. Paper, 15c (9d.). 
THE SOUL OF MAN. 
anded. 182cuts. 482 pages. Cloth, $1.50 (6s. net). 
THE CHIEF'S DAUGHTER. 
A Legend of Niagara. Illustrated. Pp. 54. Cloth, $1.00, 
TRUTH IN FICTION, Twetve Taves witH A MorRAL. 
White and gold binding, gilt edges, Pp, 111. $1.00 (5s.). 
THE RELIGION OF SCIENCE. 
Second, extra edition. Pp. 103. Cloth, 50c (2s. 6d.). 
PRIMER OF PHILOSOPHY 
240 pages. Third Edition. Cloth, $1.00 (5s.). 
THE GOSPEL OF BUDDHA. According to Old Records. 
Sixth Edition, Pp. 275. Cloth, $1.00 (5s.). In German, $1.25 (6s. 6d.), 
BUDDHISM AND ITS CHRISTIAN CRITICS. 
Pages, 311. Cloth, $1.25 (6s. 6d.). 
KARMA. A Story oF EarLty BupDDHISM. 
Illustrated by Japanese artists. Crépe paper, 75c (3s. 6d,), 
NIRVANA: A STory oF BuppHist PsycHOLoGy. 
Japanese edition, like Karvmma. $1.00 (4s. 6d.). 
LAO-TZE’S TAO TEH KING. 
Chinese-English. Pp. 360. Cloth, $3.00 (15s.). 


CORNILL, CARL HEINRICH. 
THE PROPHETS OF ISRAEL. ' 
Pp., 200. Cloth, $1.00 (58.). 
HISTORY OF THE PEOPLE OF ISRAEL, 
Pp. vi+325. Cloth, $1.50 (7s. 6d.). 


POWELL, Up W. 
TRUTH AND ERROR; or, the Science of Intellection, 
Pp. 423. Cloth, $1. 78 (7s. 6d.). 


RIBOT DE. 
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF ATTENTION. 
THE DISEASES OF PERSONALITY. 
THE DISEASES OF THE WILL. 
Cloth, 75 cents each (3s. 6d.). Fadl set, cloth, $1:75 (9s.). 
EVOLUTION OF GENERAL IDEAS. 
Pp. 231. Cloth, $1.25 (5s.). 


BUDGE, DR. E.°A. WALLIS. 
THE BOOK OF THE DEAD. 
3 vols. 420 new vignettes. Grown 8vo. Cloth, $3.75 net. 


HUTCHINSON, WOODS. 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO DARWIN. 
Pp. xii+ 241. Price, $1.50 (6s.). 
FREYTAG, GUSTAV. 
THE LOST MANUSCRIPT. A Novel. 
2vols. 953 pages. Extra cloth, $4.00 (21s). One vol., cl., $1.00 (5s.). 


MARTIN LUTHER. 
Illustrated. Pp. 130, Cloth, $1.00 (5s.). 


ACVAGHOSHA. 
DISCOURSE ON THE AWAKENING OF FAITH in the Mah4yana. 
From the Chinese by T. Suzuki. Pp., 176. Cl., $1.25 (5s. 6d.). 


TRUMBULL, M. M. 
THE FREE TRADE STRUGGLE IN ENGLAND. 
Second Edition. 296 pages. Cloth, 75c (3s. 6d.). 


WHEELBARROW: ArTICLES AND DISCUSSIONS ON THE LABOR QUESTION, 
With portrait of the author, 303 pages. Cloth, $1.00 (5s.), 


GOETHE AND SCHILLER'S XENIONS. 
Translated by Paul Carus. Album form, Pp. 162, Cl., $1.00 (5s.), 


OLDENBERG, H. 
ANCIENT INDIA: ITS LANGUAGE AND RELIGIONS. 
Pp. 110; Cloth, 50c (2s. 6d.), 


CONWAY, MONCURE D. 
SOLOMON, AND SOLOMONIC LITERATURE, 
Pp. 243. Cloth, $1.50 (6s.), 


DEDEKIND, R. 


ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF NUMBER. 
Trans. by W. W. Beman. Pp.115. Cl., 75 cents (3s, 6d.). 


GARBE, RICHARD. 
THE REDEMPTION OF THE BRAHMAN. A Tate or Hinpu LIFE. | 
Laid paper. Gilt top. 96 pages. Price, 75c (3s. 6d.). 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF ANCIENT INDIA. 
Pp. 89. Cloth, 50c (2s. 6d.). 


HUEPPE, FERDINAND. 
THE PRINCIPLES OF BACTERIOLOGY. 
28 Woodcuts. Pp. x +467. Price, $1.75 (9s.). 


LEVY-BRUHL, PROF. L. 
HISTORY OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY IN FRANCE. 
23 Portraits. Handsomely bound. Pp, 500. Price, $3.00 (12s.), 


_TOPINARD, DR. PAUL. 


SCIENCE AND FAITH. 
Pp. 374. - Cloth, $1.50 (6s. 6d.), 


BINET, ALFRED. 
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF REASONING. 
Pp. 193. Cloth, 75c (3s. 6d.). 
THE PSYCHIC LIFE OF MICRO-ORGANISMS. 
Pp. 135. Cloth, 75c (3s. 6d.). 


N. B. Send for our large ILLUSTRATED CATALOGUE, contain- 
ing full details of our publications and of our two magazines, The 
Open Court and The Montst. 


The Religion of Science Library. 


Bi-monthly reprints of standard works, philosophical classics, etc. Yearly, 


$1.50. 


No.1. 


Separate copies according to prices quoted. 


The Religion of Science, By Paut Carus. 25¢ (15. 6d.). 


2. Three Introductory Lectures on the Science of Thought. By F. Max 


MULLER. 25c (1S. 6d.). 
Three Lectures on the Science of Language. F. Max MbLuER, 25¢ (1s.6d.). 
The Diseases of Personality, By Tu. Ripot. 25¢ (1s. 6d.). 


. The Psychology of Attention. By Tu. Ripot. 25¢ (1s. 6d.). 

. The Psychic Life of Micro-Organisms. By ALFRED BINET. 25¢ (1S. 6d.). 
. The Nature of the State, By Paut Carus. 15¢ (9d.). 

. On Double Comsciousness. By ALFRED BINET. 15¢ (9d.). 

. Fundamental Problems. By Paut Carus. 50¢ (2s. 6d,). 

. The Diseases of the Will, By TH. Ripot. 25¢ (18. 6d.). 

. The Origin of Language. By Lupwic Notre. 15¢ (9d.). F 

. The Free Trade Struggle in England. M.M. TRUMBULL. 25¢ (1S. 6d.). 
. Wheelbarrow on the Labor Question, By M. M. TRUMBULL. 35c (2s.). 

. The Gospel of Buddha, By Paut Carus. 35¢ (28.). ; 

. The Primer of Philosophy, By Paut Carus. 25¢ (18. 6d.). 

. On Memory, and The Specific Energies of the Nervous System, By Pror. 


EWALp HErinG. ‘15¢ (9d.). 


. The Redemption of the Brahman, Tale of Hindu Life. By RicHARD 


GARBE, 25C (1S. 6d.). 


. An Examination of Weismannism, By G. J. ROMANES. 35€ (2s.). 

. On Germinal Selection. By AUGUST WEISMANN. 25C (IS. 6d.). 

. Lovers Three Thousand Years Ago. By T., A. Goopwin. (Out of print.) 
. Popular Scientific Lectures. By Ernst Macw. 500 (2s. 6d.). 

. Ancient India: Its Language and Religions. By H. OLDENBERG. 25C¢ 


(1s. 6d.). 


. The Prophets of Israel. By Pror. C. H. CorniLy, 25¢ (1. 6d.). 

. Homilies of Science. By PAUL CaRuUS. 35€ (28.). 

. Thoughts on Religion, By G.]. RoMANES. 50¢ (2s. 6d.). 

. The Philosophy of Ancient India, By ProF. RICHARD GARBE, 25C (IS. 6d.). 
. Martin Luther. By Gustav FREyTAG. 25¢ (1S. 6d.). 

. English Secularism, By GEORGE JAcoB HoLyoakE, 25¢ (1S. 6d.). 

. On Orthogenesis, By TH. EIMER. 25¢ (1S. 6d.). . 

. Chinese Philosophy. By PAuL Carus. 25¢ (1S. 6d.). 

. The Lost Manuscrift, By Gustav FREyYTAG. 60c (3s.). 

. A Mechanico-Phystological Theory of Organic Evolution, By CARL VON 


NAEGELI, 15c (9d.). 


. Chinese Fiction. By Dr. GEORGE T. CANDLIN. 15¢ (9d.), 

. Mathematical Essays and Recreations. By H. SCHUBERT. 25¢ (1S. 6d.). 
. The Ethical Froblem, By Paut Carus. 500¢ (2s. 6d.). 

. Buddhism and Its Christian Critics, By Paut Carus. 50¢ (2s. 6d.). 

. Psychology for Beginners. By Hiram M. STANLEY. 20C (IS.). 

. Discourse on Method, By DESCARTES. 25c (1s. 6d.). 

. The Dawn of a New Era. By Paut Carus. 15¢ (9d.). 

. Kant and Spencer. By Paut Carus, 20€ (Is.), 

. The Soul of Man. By Paut Carus. 75¢ (3s. 6d.). 

. World's Congress Addresses. By C. C. Bonney. 15¢ (9d.). 

. The Gospel According to Darwin. By Woops HutTcuinson. 50€ (23. 6d.). 
. Whence and Whither, By Paut Carus. 25¢ (1s. 6d.). 

. Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding. By Davip HuME. 25¢ 


(1s. 6d.). 


. Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals, By David HuME, 25c 


(1s. 6d.). 


. The Psychology of Reasoning, By ALFRED BINET. 25¢ (1s. 6d.). 
. The Principles of Human Knowledge. By GEORGE BERKELEY. 25C (ts.6d.). 
. Three Dialogues Between Hylas and Philonous, By GEORGE BERKELEY. 


25c (1s. 6d.). 


. Public Worship: A Study in. the Psychology of Religion, By Joun P. 


HyLan. 25c (1s. 6d.), 


. Descartes’ Meditations, with Selections from the Principles, 35c (2s.). 
. Kant's Prolegomena,. 50c (2s. 6d.). (In preparation.) 


The Open Court Publishing Company 


"J - DASE DUE an 


UN 24 


i) 


es a 7 i ae ae ~ rap 
a 2 , 
5 —_ a 7 a 
‘ a] 


GAYLORD 


i 
A, 
fe. 1] 
ww. 


nal 
J 


re 


om Li nd 


2400. Rides Res 


Borkeiey <3 : 
For 1 rene weis ca Lief Lupe 


All items are oe 
eso 


at 


BERKELEY, CALIFORNIA 


LOANED BY THE TRUSTEES OF THE 


HENRY PIERCE LIBRARY 
SAN FRANCISCO 


PUBLISHERS, NOTE 


EOE 


Messrs. Kican PaAuvt, TRENCH, Trupyger & Co., Lrp., beg to 
announce that they have still in stock a limited number of the 
larger edition of the hieroglyphic text and translation of the 
Theban Recension of the Book of the Dead, with the hiero- 
glyphie vocabulary by Dr. Waxiis Bupa, which appeared in 
three volumes under the title ‘CHAPTER or Comina Forru 
BY Day,” late in 1897. 


Price for the Entire Work, £2 10s. 


VouumeE I. contains all the known Chapters of the Theban 
Recension of the Book of the Dead, printed in hieroglyphic 
type (pp. 1—517), and a description of the papyri in the British 
Museum. from which they have been edited, and a list of 
Chapters, ete. (pp. i-xl.). This edition is the most complete 
which has hitherto been published. 


VotuMeE IJ. contains a full vocabulary (pp. 1—386) to all the 
hieroglyphic texts of the Chapters of the Theban Recension of 
the Book of the Dead and to the supplementary Chapters 
from the Saite Recension which are given therewith in Volume 
I. The volume contains about 35,000 references. 


Votume IIT. contains :— 
Preface and list of Chapters (i.-xxxvi.). 
1. IntRoDUcTION (pp. xxxvii.-cciv.) :— 

Chap. I—The History of the Book of the Dead. This 
Chapter is accompanied by eighteen plates which illus- 
trate the palesography of the various Recensions of the 
Book of the Dead from the Vth Dynasty to the Roman 
Period. 

VOL. I. = 


Chap. 1J.— Osiris and the Resurrection, 

i J11.—The Judgment of the Dead. 

a IV.—The Elysian Fields or Heaven. With extracts 
from the Pyramid Texts. 

- V.—The Magic of the Book of the Dead. 

~ V1I.—tThe Object and Contents of the Book of the Dead. 

» WIl—The Book of the Dead of Nesi-Khonsu, about 
B.C. 1000 (English translation). 

»  VIlIl—The Book of Breathings (English translation). 

5 IX.—The Papyrus of Takhert-puru-abt (English 
translation). 


2. EnerisH TRANSLATION OF THE Book OF THE DEAD 
(pp. 1—354). The volume also contains three scenes from the 
famous Papyrus of Ani representing the Judgment Scene, the 
Funeral Procession, and the Elysian Fields, which have been 
reproduced in full colours by Mr. W. Griggs, the eminent 
photo-lithographer. 


BOOKS ON 
EGYPT AND CHALDAEA 


By A. EH. WALLIS BUDGE, M-A., Lrrr.D., D.Lrr. 


Keeper of the Egyptian and Assyrian Antiquities in 
the British Museum 


AND 


L. W. KING, M.A. 


Assistant in the Department of Egyptian and Assyrian Antiquities in 
the British Museum 


Crown S8vo, 3s. 6d. net each. 


Vol. I.— Egyptian Religion: Egyptian Ideas of a Future 
Life. By E. A. Watts Buper. 

f Il.— Egyptian Magic. By EH. A. Watiis Bupa. 

IlJ.—Egyptian Language: Easy Lessons in Egyptian 

Hieroglyphics. By EK. A. Watuis BupGe. 

IV.—Babylonian Religion: Babylonian Religion and 

Mythology. By L. W. Kine. 

5 V.—Assyrian Language; Kasy Lessons in the Cunei- 
. form Inscriptions. By L. W. Kine. 

Vols. VI—VIII.—The Book of the Dead: An English 
Translation of the Theban Recension, with 
supplementary Chapters, Hymns, etc, and 
420 Vignettes which do not appear in the 
larger, edition published in 1897. By EK. A. 
Wats Buper. 


” 


The above volumes are now ready, and will be followed by :— 


Vol. I[X.—Mesopotamian Magic; A Study of Babylonian 
Sorcery and Witchcraft. By L. W. Kine. 
X.—The Rosetta Stone. By EH. A. Wattis Bunge. 


” 


LONDON 
KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER & COP Lins 
PatTERNOSTER Housr, CHARING Cross RoAD 
1901 


Books on Egypt and Chaldaea 


Vor, VII. OF THE SERIES 


ger rob) Ob OP En” DBA D 


ENGLISH TRANSLATION IN THREE VOLUMES 
Vout. Il. 


CHAPTERS LXV.—CLIX. 


PUBLISHERS Noe 


EEE 


In the year 1894 Dr. Wallis Budge prepared for Messrs. Kegan 
Paul, Trench, Triibner & Co. an elementary work on the 
Kgyptian language, entitled “ First Steps in Egyptian,” and two 
years later the companion volume, “ An Egyptiah Reading 
Book,” with transliterations of all the texts printed in it, and 
a full vocabulary. The success of these works proved that 
they had helped to satisfy a want long felt by students of the 
Egyptian language, and as a similar want existed among 
students of the languages written in the cuneiform character, 
Mr. L. W. King, of the British Museum, prepared on the same 
lines as the two books mentioned above, an elementary work on 
the Assyrian and Babylonian languages (“First Steps in 
Assyrian”), which appeared in 1898. These works, however, 
dealt mainly with the philological branch of Egyptology and 
Assyriology, and it was impossible in the space allowed to 
explain much that needed explanation in the other branches of 
these subjects—that is to say, matters relating to the arche- 
ology, history, religion, etc., of the Egyptians, Assyrians, and 
Babylonians. Jn answer to the numerous requests which haye 
been made, a series of short, popular handbooks on the most 
important branches of Hgyptology and Assyriology have been 
prepared, and it is hoped that these will serve as introductions 
to the larger works on these subjects. The present is the 
seventh volume of the series, and the succeeding volumes will 
be published at short intervals, and at moderate prices. 


Books on Egypt and Chaldaca 


THE 


HOLM Tle Wale IDE AD, 


AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION OF THE CHAPTERS 
= 


HYMNS, ETC., OF THE THEBAN RECENSION 
WITH INTRODUCTION, NOTES 


BY j \ a 
E. A. WALLIS BUDGE, PA., Lirt.D., D.Lrr | 
KEEPER OF THE EGYPTIAN AND 


IN THE BRITISH MUS 


WITH FOUR HUNDRED & TWENTY VIGNETTES 


¥ 


7 Property. of 
CHICAGO. 


THE OPEN COURT PUBLISHING. CBSK 


LONDON Please return to 
KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRU 


‘oor Graduate theological 


Wasion Library 


LONDON: 


CONTENTS OF VOLUME II. 


CHAP, PAGE 


~- DLXVsa—TuHEe CHAPTER OF COMING FORTH BY DAY 
AND OF GAINING THE MASTERY OVER 


ENEMIES. With vignette, . ; : , 225 
LX Vs.—-With vignette . : : 3 227 
LXVIL—TxHE CHAPTER OF COMING FORTH BY DAY. 
With vignette . : : : : . 229 
LXVII.—Tue CHarrEr OF OPENING THE UNDERWORLD. 
With vignette  . : - : - . 230 
LXVIIL—Tur CHAPTER OF COMING FORTH BY DAY. 
With vignette. : : ? c 5 BBY 
LXIX.—ANoTHER CHAPTER . > 3 ; : . 34. 
LX X.--ANOTHER CHAPTER . : j 4 : . 2386 
LXXIL—Tur CHAPTER OF COMING FORTH BY DAY. 
With vignette. : ; : ; 5 By 
LXXII.—Tue CHAPTER OF COMING FORTH BY DAY AND 
OF OPENING UP A way THROUGH AMEHET. 
With vignettes. : ; : 4 . 241 
LXXIIi.—See ChapterIX. . . . ek ee 
LXXIV.—Tur CHAPTER OF LIFTING UP THE FEET AND 
OF COMING FORTH UPON THE EARTH. With 
vignette : : : . . 244 
LXXV, —Ffur CHAPTER OF JOURNEYING TO ee AND 
OF RECEIVING A THRONE THEREIN. With 
vignette , ’ : . : . . 245 
VOL. II. a 


An ai ; 


11 CONTENTS OF VOLUME II. 
CHAP. 

LXXVI.—TuHE CuarrerR OF A MAN TRANSFORMING 
HIMSELF INTO WHATEVER FORM HE 

PLEASETH. With vignette 
LXXVII.—TuHE CHAPTER OF MAKING THE TRANS- 
FORMATION INTO A HAWK OF GOLD. 
With vignette F : ; : 
LXXVIII.—Tue Cuarrer OF MAKING THE TRANSFORMA- 
TION INTO A DIVINE HAWK. WITH vig- 
nette F “ 5 : . 
LXXIX.—TueE CHAPTER OF BEING TRANSFORMED INTO 
THE GOVERNOR OF THE SOVEREIGN PRINCES. 
With vignette 
LXXX.—Tue CHAPTER OF MAKING THE TRANSFORMA- 


. . . 


TION INTO THE GOD WHO GIVETH LIGHT IN 


THE DARKNESS. With vignette . : 
LXXXIJA.—TuHe CHAPTER OF MAKING THE TRANSFORMA- 
TION INTO A LOTUS. With vignette : 
LX X XIs.—TuHE CHAPTER OF MAKING THE TRANSFORMA- 
TION INTO A Lotus. With vignette ; 


LXXXIJII.—TnE CHarrer OF MAKING THE TRANSFORMA- 
TION INTO PrAH, OF EATING CAKES, AND 

OF DRINKING ALE, AND OF UNFETTERING 

THE STEPS, AND OF BECOMING A LIVING 

BELNG IN ANNU. With two vignettes . 
LXXXIII.—Tur Carrer OF MAKING THE TRANSFORMA- 
TION INTO A Bennu Birp. With vignette 
LXXXIV.—TukE CHAPTER OF MAKING THE TRANSFORMA- 
TION INTO A HERON. With vignette . 
LXXXV.—TueE CHAPTER OF MAKING THE TRANSFORMA- 
TION INTO A LIVING SOUL, AND OF NOT 


ENTERING INTO THE CHAMBER OF TORTURE, ~ 


With vignettes 2 a : ‘ : 
LXXXVI.—Tur CHAprmr OF MAKING THE TRANSFORMA- 
TION INTO A SWALLOW. With vignettes. 
LXXXVII.—Tue Cuarrer of MAKING THE TRANSPORMA- 
TION INTO THE SERPENT Sata, With 

vignettes : . : 


. . . 


PAGE 


248 


258 


261 


263 


264 


265 


268 


270 


272 


275 


CONTENTS OF VOLUME II. 


CHAP. 
LXXXVIII.—TuE CHAPTER OF MAKING THE TRANSFORMA- 


TION INTO A CROCODILE. .With vignette 
LXXXIX.—THE CHAPTER OF CAUSING THE SOUL TO BE 
UNITED TO THE BODY IN THE UNDER- 
worLtp. With vignette . F : 
XC.—THE CHAPTER OF DRIVING EVIL RECOLLEC- 
TIONS FROM THE MOUTH. With vignette 
XCI. —THE CHAPTER OF NOT LETTING THE SOUL OF 
THE DECEASED BE CAPTIVE IN THE UNDER- 
worLp. With vignette . : : 2 
XCIT.—Tur CHAPTER OF OPENING THE TOMB TO 
THE SOUL AND TO THE SHADE OF THE 
DECEASED SO THAT HE MAY COME FORTH 
BY DAY AND HAVE DOMINION OVER HIS 
FEET. With three vignettes . : 
XCIII.—Tue CnHarrer oF NOT SAILING TO THE EAST 
IN THE UNDERWORLD. With vignette 
XCIV.—THE CHAPTER OF PRAYING FOR AN INK-POT 
AND FOR A PALETTE. With vignette 
XCV.—THE CHAPTER OF BEING NIGH UNTO THOTH. 
With two vignettes : : 
XCVL Tuer CHAPTER OF BEING NIGH UNTO Gs 
XCVIL AND OF GIVING GLORY UNTO A MAN IN 
( THE UNDERWORLD. With two vignettes 
XCVIII.—Tur CHAPTER OF BRINGING ALONG A BOAT 
IN HEAVEN. With vignette 5 
XCIX.—TuHE CHAPTER OF BRINGING ALONG A BOAT 
IN THE UNDERWORLD. With two vig- 
nettes . : 


OF CAUSING HIM TO GO FORTH INTO THE 
BOAT OF RA ALONG WITH THOSE WHO ARE 
IN HIS FOLLOWING. With vignette 
CI.—TueE CHAPTER OF PROTECTING THE BOAT OF 
: Ri. With vignette ; 5 
CII.—Tue CHAPTER OF GOING INTO THE BOAT OF 
Ra. With vignette , ; 


285 


297 


iV CONTENTS OF VOLUME II. 


CHAP, 
CIIl.—Tue CHAPTER OF BEING WITH THE GODDESS 


Harnor. With vignette . ; : é 
CIV.—TuHE CHAPTER OF SITTING AMONG THE GREAT 
aops. With vignette j : : 
CV.—THE CHAPTER OF MAKING OFFERINGS TO THE 
Ka IN THE UNDERWORLD. With vig- 

nette : 5 : : 5 
CV1I.—TueE CHAPTER OF GIVING OFFERINGS TO THE DE- 
CEASED IN Her-Pran-Ka (Memphis). With 
vignette . : 5 é - : : : 
CVIl.—See Chapter CIX. . ? : : ; : 
CVIII.—Tuer CHAPTER OF KNOWING THE SOULS OF THE 


West. With vignette . 5 F 3 
CIX.—THE CHAPTER OF KNOWING THE SOULS OF THE 
East. With vignette . “ : : 5 


CX.—HERE BEGIN THE CHAPTERS OF SEKHET-HETEPET 
AND THE CHAPTERS OF COMING FORTH BY DAY ; 
OF GOING INTO AND OF COMING FORTH FROM 
THE UNDERWORLD ;. OF COMING TO SEKHET- 
Aarv; OF BEING IN SEKHET-HETEPET, THE 
MIGHTY LAND, THE LADY OF WINDS; OF 
HAVING POWER THERE; OF BECOMING A Kuu 
THERE ; OF PLOUGHING THERE; OF REAPING 
THERE; OF EATING THERE; OF DRINKING 
THERE; OF MAKING LOVE THERE; AND OF 
DOING EVERYTHING THERE EVEN AS A MAN 
DOETH UPON EARTH. With eight vignettes . 


CXI.—See Chapter CVIIL . : 5 : Z 
CXII.—Tuer CHAPTER OF KNOWING THE Scuee or Pr. 
With vignette é F : : : 5 
CXIII.—Tur CHAPTER OF KNOWING THE SOULS OF 
Nexuren. With vignette  . : : : 
CXIV.—THE CHAPTER OF KNOWING THE SOULS OF 
Kuemennvu. With vignette. é : : 


CXV.—TuE CHAPTER OF COMING FORTH FROM HEAVEN, 
AND OF MAKING A WAY THROUGH THE AMME- 
HET, AND OF KNOWING THE Souts or ANNU, 
With vignette ; : ‘ , : : 


PAGE 


309 


310 


311 


313 
314 
314 


317 


319 
335 


CONTENTS OF VOLUME II. 


CHAP, 
CXVI.—ANOTHER CHAPTER OF KNOWING THE SOULS OF 


Kuyemennv. With vignette : 
CXVII.—Tu CHaprer OF FINDING (?) PATHS WHEREON 
TO WALK IN Re-stavu. With vignette 
CXVIIL—TuHrE CHAPTER OF COMING FORTH FROM RE- 
stau. With vignette : - . - 
CXIX.—TuHE CHAPTER OF COMING FORTH FROM ReE- 
stau. Wich vignette. 
CXX.—See Chapter XII... : 
CXXI.—See Chapter XITI.. 2 ; : : 
CXXII.—TuHr CHAPTER OF GOING IN AFTER COMING 
FORTH [FROM THE UNDERWORLD]. With 
vignette : - < 5 : 
CXXIIT. or CX XXIX.—TuHE Guarrik OF ENTERING 
INTO THE GREAT House. With vignette 
CXXIV.—TuHE CHAPTER OF GOING INTO THE PRESENCE 
OF THE DIVINE SOVEREIGN PRINCES OF 
Osiris. With vignette . : 4 
CXXV.—1. THE CHAPTER OF ENTERING INTO THE Hie 
or MAATI . F i : d ; : 
[A CHAPTER] TO BE SATD WHEN THE DE- 
CEASED COMETH FORTH INTO THE HALL OF 
MAAtI, so THAT HE MAY BE SEPARATED 
FROM EVERY SIN WHICH HE HATH DONE, 
AND MAY BEHOLD THE FACES OF THE GODS 
. Tur NEGATIVE CONFESSION . : - 
3. [A CuarrER] TO BE SAID WHEN THE DE- 
CEASED COMETH FORTH TO THE GODS OF THE 
UNDERWORLD. With six vignettes 
CXXVI.—[Tue Carter or THE Four Apss]. With 
vignette . c : é 4 
CXXVITa.—Tue Book or THE ae OF THE GODS OF 
THE QERTI. With vignette  . : - 
CXXVIIz.—A CHAPTER TO BE RECITED WHEN THE DE- 
CEASED COMETH BEFORE THE DIVINE SOVE= 
REIGN CHIEFS OF OSIRIS TO OFFER PRAISE 
UNTO THE GODS WHO ARE THE GUIDES OF 
THE UNDERWORLD 35733, ; . . F 


bo 


PAGE 


350 


351 


384 


vi CONTENTS OF VOLUME II. 


CHAP. 


CXXVIII.—A Hymn or Praise To Osiris. With 
vignette . : 7 - : - 

CXXIX.—See Chapter C. With vignette . c : 
CX XX.—ANOTHER CHAPTER OF MAKING PERFECT THE 
Kivu, WHICH IS TO BE RECITED ON THE 

BIRTHDAY OF OSIRIS, AND OF MAKING 

THE SOUL TO LIVE FOR EVER. With 


vignette . ; x Z 5 ; 
CXXXI.—Tue CHAPTER OF HAVING EXISTENCE NIGH 
unto RA. . : 4 ‘5 


CXXXII—THE CHAPTER OF CAUSING A MAN TO COME 

BACK TO SEE HIS HOUSE UPON EARTH, 

With two vignettes 5 : : : 

CXXXIII.—Tue Book of MAKING PERFECT THE Kuv, 

WHICH IS TO BE RECITED ON THE DAY OF 

THE MONTH, With two vignettes . : 

CXXXTV.—ANoTHER CHAPTER OF MAKING PERFECT THE 
Kuv. With two vignettes . Z 

CXXXV.—ANOTHER CHAPTER TO BE RECITED WHEN 

THE MOON RENEWETH ITSELF ON THE DAY 

OF THE MONTH. ‘ ; : : - 

CXXXVIa.—1l. ANOTHER CHAPTER OF TRAVELLING IN 

THE GREAT Boat or Ra. With vignette 

2. ANOTHER CHAPTER OF MAKING PERFECT 

THE KuHU, WHICH SHALL BE RECITED ON 

THE FESTIVAL OF SIX . , : 

CXXXVIs.—TuHer CHAPTER OF SAILING IN THE Guus 

Boat oF RA TO PASS OVER THE CIRCLE OF 

BRIGHT FLAME. With vignette. : 

CXXXVIl4.—Tuer CHAPTER OF THE FOUR BLAZING FLAMES 

WHICH ARE MADE FOR THE Kuvu. With 


Vv ignette ‘ 7 . - : 
CX XX VIIs.—TueE CHAPTER OF KINDLING A FLAME. With 
vignette . ‘ , A . 


CXXXVIII.—Tue Cuarter oF ENTERING INTO ABTU 
(ABYDOS) AND OF BEING IN THE FOLLOW- 
tn@ oF Osiris. With vignette 


PAGE 


387 
389 


390 


397 


399 


400 


403 


406 


407 


408 


411 


414 


421 


423 


CONTENTS OF VOLUME II. 


OXXXIX.—See Chapter CX XIII. eee 
CXL.—-Tue Book wHIcH Is TO BE RECITED ON THE 
LAST DAY OF THE SECOND MONTH OF THE 
SEASON PERT. With vignette 
OXLL | Tue Book WHICH A MAN SHALL RECITE FOR 
CXLIL HIS FATHER OR FOR HIS SON DURING THE 
FESTIVALS OF AMENTET : 
CXLIII.—Vignette only. ; 
CXLIV. 2)Tae CHAPTER OF THE ARITS OR Maxsioxs} 
With two vignettes . 3 : , 
CXLV.—[Tur Cuarrers or] tHE Pytons or SEKHET- 
AANRE OF THE House or Osiris. With 
twenty-one vignettes . : 5 . 
CXLVI.—Tur CHAPTERS OF ENTERING IN AT THE 
HIDDEN PyLons or THE HousE oF OsIRIS 
In Sexuet-AAyrerv. With eleven’ vig- 
nettes . ; : 
CXLVII.—[Tue Cnaprer or THE ente! OR MuAKs10xa) 
With seven vignettes. é : : ; 
CXLVIII.—Tur CuHarrer OF PROVIDING THE DECEASED 
WITH FOOD IN THE UNDERWORLD. With 
five vignettes : A 3 
CXLIX.—[Tur Cuaprer oF THE Coat With fourteen 
vignettes. . c : : . : 
CL.—With fifteen vignettes. : : - : 
CLIa.—Texts and vignette of the funeral chamber . 
CLIs.—Speech of Anubis. With vignette. : : 
CLIL—Tue& CHAPTER OF BUILDING A HOUSE UPON THE 
EARTH. With vignette  . : : . 
CLIIIa.—Tue CuHarrer OF COMING FORTH FROM THE 
Net. With vignette. : : . < 
CLIIIs.—Tut CHAPTER OF COMING FORTH FROM THE 
CATCHER OF THE FIsH. With vignette 
CLIV.—Tue CHAPTER OF NOT LETTING THE BODY 
PERISH. With vignette. 4 : 
CLV.—Tur CuAprer or A Ter oF GoLp. With 
vignette. F js ; , : ; 


447 


464. 


473 


480 


vili CONTENTS OF VOLUME II. 
CHAP. $ PAGE 
CLVL—TuEe Cuarrer oF A BucKLE OF CARNELIAN, 
With vignette : 3) Rae ee O22: 
CLVIL—Tur CHAPTER OF A VULTURE OF GOLD. Bis 
vignette... =. .) | ees 
CLVIII—Tue Cuarrer or A CoLLAR OF GOLD. With 
vignette . : : . . . 


CLIX.—Tue CHaprer oF THE UATCH AMULET. 
vignette, =. «. 


POE ROORO© tL I DEAT 


CHAPTER LXY. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 15).] 


Vignette : The deceased kneeling in adoration before Ra, 
hawk-headed, and having a disk encircled by an uraeus on his 
head (see Naville, op. cit., Bd. I. Bl. 77). 


Text: (1) THE CHAPTER OF COMING FORTH BY DAY 
AND OF GAINING THE MASTERY OVER ENEMIES. The 
overseer of the house of the overseer of the seal, Nu, 
saith :— (2) 

“Ra sitteth in his habitation of millions of years, 
“and he hath gathered together the company of the 
“ gods, with those divine beings, whose faces are hidden, 

VOL. II. B 


226 OF CONQUERING ENEMIES [Chap. Ixv. 3 


“who dwell in the Temple of Khepera, who eat (3) the 
“god Bah’ and who drink the drink-offerings which 
“are brought into the celestial regions of light; and 
“conversely. Grant that I may take possession of the 
“captives (4) of Osiris, and never let me have my being 
‘among the fiends of Suti! Hail, let me sit upon his 
“folds in the habitation of the god User-ba.? (5) 
“Grant thou that I may sit upon the throne of Ra, and 
“Jet me have possession of my body before the god Seb. 
“Grant thou that Osiris may come forth triumphant 
“over Suti [and over] the night-watchers (6) of Suti, 
“and over the night-watchers of the Crocodile, yea the 
‘“night-watchers of the Crocodile, whose faces are 
“hidden and who dwell in the divine Temple of the 
‘“ King of the North in the apparel of the gods on the 
“sixth day of the festival, (7) whose snares are like 
“unto everlastingness and whose cords are like unto 
“eternity. I have seen the god Abet-ka placing the 
“cord; the child is tied with (8) fetters, and the rope of 
“the god Ab-ka is drawn tight (?)..... Behold me. 
“Tam born, and I come forth in the form of a living 
‘“ Khu, (9) and the human beings who are upon the 
‘earth ascribe praise [unto me]. Hail, Mer, who doest 
“these things for me, and who art put an end to by the 
“vigour of Ra, grant thou that I may see Ra; (10) 
“orant thou that I may come forth against my enemies ; 
“and grant thou that I may be victorious over them in 


1 T.e., “ the Inundation of the Nile.” 


9 


* I.e., ‘he of the strong soul.” 


Chap. Ixv. 14] OF CONQUERING ENEMIES 227 


“the presence of the sovereign princes of the great god 
“who are in the presence of the great god. If, repuls- 
“ing [me], thou dost not (11) allow me to come forth 
“against my Enemy and to be victorious over him 
“before the sovereign princes, then may Hapi—who 
“liveth upon law and order—not come forth into 
‘heaven—now he liveth by Maat—(12) and may Ra— 
“who feedeth upon fish—not descend into the waters! 
“And then, verily shall Ra—who feedeth upon law 
“and order—come forth into heaven, and then, verily, 
“(13) shall Hapi—who feedeth upon fish—descend 
“into the waters; and then, verily, the great day 
“upon the earth shall not be in its season. I have 
“come against my Enemy, (14) he hath been given 
“unto me, he hath come to an end, and I have gotten 
“possession [of him] before the sovereign princes.” 


CHAPTER LXV. 


[From Lepsius, Todtenbuch, Bl. 25.] 


Vignette: The deceased standing up and holding a staff in 
his left hand. 


228 OF CONQUERING ENEMIES [Chap. Ixy 


Text: (1) THE CHAPTER OF COMING FORTH BY DAY 
AND OF GAINING THE MASTERY OVER ENEMIES. 


“Fail, [thou] who shinest from the Moon and who 
“sendest forth light therefrom, thou comest forth 
“among thy multitudes, and thou goest round about, 
“let me rise,” or (as others say), ‘let me be brought in 
“among the Spirits, and let the underworld be opened 
“unto me]. (2) Behold, I have come forth on this 
“day, and I have become a Khw (or a shining being) ; 
“therefore shall the Khus let me live, and they shall 
“cause my enemies to be brought to me in a state of 
‘misery in the presence of the divine sovereign princes. 
“The divine ka (double) of my mother (3) shall rest in 
“peace because of this, and I shall stand upon my feet 
“and have a staff of gold,” or (as others say), “a rod 
“of gold in my hand, wherewith I shall inflict cuts on 
“the limbs [of mine enemy] and shall live. The legs 
“of Sothis are stablished, and I am born in their state 
“of rest.” 


Chap. Ixvi. 1-4] OF COMING FORTH BY DAY 229 


CHAPTER LXVI. 


[From the Papyrus of Amen-em-heb (Naville, op. cit., Bd. I. 
Bl. 78). ] 


Vignette: In the only papyrus of the Theban period known 
to contain this Chapter it has no vignette. In the Turin 
Papyrus the vignette is the same as that of Chapter LXV. 


Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF COMING FORTH BY 
pay. ‘The scribe Mahu saith :— 


“T have knowledge. JI was conceived by (2) the 
“‘ooddess Sekhet, and the goddess Neith gave birth to 
“me. I am Horus, and [I have] (3) come forth from the 
“Hye of Horus. I am Uatchit who came forth from 
“Horus. I am Horus and [ fly up (4) and perch 
“myself upon the forehead of Ra in the bows of his 
“boat which is in heaven.” 


NS 
Ge 
e) 


OF OPENING THE UNDERWORLD | [Chap. Ixvii. 


CHAPTER LXVII. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 15). ] 


Y 


a 
<< 


Vignette : This Chapter is without a vignette in the Theban 
Recension, but in the Turin Papyrus the vignette is the same 
as that of Chapters LXV. and LXVI. 


Text: (1) Tur CHAPTER OF OPENING THE UNDER- 
worLp. The overseer of the house of the overseer of 
the seal, Nu, triumphant, saith :— (2) 

“The chamber of those who dwell in Nu is opened, 
‘‘and the footsteps of those who dwell with the god of 
“Light are set free. The chamber of Shu is opened, 
“and he cometh forth; and I shall come forth (3) 
“outside, and I shall advance from my territory(?), I 
shall recelve iy ety and I shall lay firm hold upon 
“the tribute in the House of the Chief of his dead. 
(4) I shall advance to my throne which is in the boat 
“of Ra. I shall not be molested, and I shall not suffer 
‘shipwreck from my throne which is im the boat of Ra, 
“(5) the mighty one. Hail, thou that shinest and 
“oivest light from Hent-she !” 


Chap. Ixviii. 4] OF COMING FORTH BY DAY 


iS) 
Oo 
la 


CHAPTER LXVIII. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 7).] 


Vignette: The deceased kneeling before the goddess Hathor 
seated by a tree (see Naville, op. cit., Bd. I. Bl. 80), or the 
deceased standing before a table of offerings and adoring a 
goddess who stands in a shrine (see Lepsius, Todtenbuch, Bl. 25). 


Text: (1) THE CHAPTER OF COMING FORTH (2) BY 
DAY. The overseer of the house of the overseer of the 
- seal, Nu, triumphant, saith :— 


“The doors of heaven are opened for me, the doors 
“of earth are opened for me, the bars and bolts of Seb 
“are opened for me, (3) and the first temple hath been 
“unfastened for me by the god Petra. Behold, I was 
“ouarded and watched, [but now] I am released ; 
“behold, his hand had tied cords round me and his 
“hand had darted upon me (4) in the earth. MRe-hent! 
“hath been been opened for me and Re-hent hath been 


! T.e,, the entrance to one of the great celestial canals. 


232 OF COMING FORTH BY DAY [Chap, Ixviii, 5 


‘“‘unfastened before me, Re-hent hath been given unto 
“me, and I shall come forth by day into whatsoever 
“place I please. Ihave gained the mastery over my 
“heart; (5) I have gained the mastery over my 
“breast (?); I have gained the mastery over my two 
“hands; I have gained the mastery over my two 
“feet; I have gained the mastery over my mouth; 
“T have gained (6) the mastery over my whole body ; 
“T have gained the mastery over sepulchral offerings ; 
“T have gained the mastery over the waters; I have 
‘‘oained the mastery over the air; I have gained the 
‘mastery (7) over the canal; I have gained the 
“mastery over the river and over the land; I have 
‘‘oained the mastery over the furrows ; I have gained 
“the mastery over the male workers for me; (8) I have 
‘“oained the mastery over the female workers for me in 
“the underworld ; I have gained the mastery over [all] 
“the things which were ordered to be done for me 
‘upon the earth, according to the entreaty which ye ~ 
“spake for me (9) [saying], ‘ Behold, let him live upon 
“the bread of Seb.’ That which is an abomination 
“unto me, I shall not eat, [nay] I shall live upon 
“cakes [made] of white grain, and my ale shall be 
“|made] of the red grain (10) of Hapi.t In a clean 
“place shall I sit on the ground beneath the foliage of 
“the date palm of the goddess Hathor, who dwelleth in 
“the spacious Disk (11) as it advanceth to Annu 


! T.e., the Nile. 


Chap. xviii, 17] OF COMING FORTH BY DAY 233 


“ (Heliopolis), having the books of the divine words 
“of the writings of the god Thoth. I have gained the 
“mastery over my heart; I have gained the mastery 
“over my heart’s place (or breast) (12); I have gained 
“the mastery over my mouth; I have gained the 
“mastery over my two hands; I have gained the 
“mastery over the waters; I have gained the mastery 
“over the canal; I have gained the mastery over (13) 
“the river; I have gained the mastery over the 
“furrows ; I have gained the mastery over the men 
“who work for me; I have gained the mastery over 
“the women who work (14) for me in the underworld; 
“T have gained the mastery over [all] the things which 
“were ordered to be done for me upon earth and in the 
“underworld. I shall lift myself up on my left side, 
“and I shall place myself on my right side; (15) I 
“shall lift myself up on my right side, and I shall 
“place myself [on my left side]. I shall sit down, I 
“shall stand up, and I shall place myself in [the path 
“of]| the wind (16) like a guide who is well prepared.” 


RUBRIC: If this composition be known [by the deceased] 
he shall come forth by day, and he shall be in a position to 
journey about over the earth among the living, and he shall 
never suffer diminution, (17) never, never. 


234 OF COMING FORTH BY DAY (Chap. Ixix, 1 


CHAPTER LXIX. 


[From the Papyrus of Mes-em-neter (Naville, op. cit., Bd. I. 
Bl. 81).] 


Vignette: This Chapter is without a vignette both in the 
Theban and Saite Recensions of the Book of the Dead. 


Text: (1) ANoTHER (2) CHAPTER. 


“T am the Fire-god, the divine brother of the Fire- 
“ood, and [I am] Osiris the brother of Isis. My divine 
‘son, together with his mother Isis, hath avenged me 
‘on mine enemies. (3) My enemies have wrought 
“every [kind of] evil, therefore their arms, and hands, 
“and feet, have been fettered by reason of their wicked- 
“ness which they have wrought (4) upon me. I am 
“Osiris, the first-born of the divine womb, the first- 
“born of the gods, and the heir of my father Osiris- 
“Seb (?). Iam Osiris, the lord of the heads (5) that 
“live, mighty of breast and powerful of back, with a 
‘phallus which goeth to the remotest limits [where] 
“men and women |live]. I am Sah (Orion) who 
“travelleth over his domain and who journeyeth along 
“before (6) the stars of heaven, [which is] the belly of 
“my mother Nut; she conceived me through her love, 
‘“‘and she gave birth to me because it was her will so to 
“do, Iam (7) Anpu (Anubis) on the day of the god 
“Sepa. Iam the Bull at the head of the meadow. I, 


1 A name of Osiris, 


Chap. Ixix, 15] OF COMING FORTH BY DAY 235 


“even I, am Osiris who imprisoned his father together 
“with his mother (8) on the day of making the great 
“slaughter ; now, [his] father is Seb, and [his] mother 
“is Nut. I am Horus, the first-born of Ra of the 
“risings. I am Anpu (Anubis) [on the day of] (9) 
“the god Sepa. I, even I, am the lord Tem. I am 
“QOsiris. Hail, thou divine first-born, who dost enter 
“and dost speak before the divine Scribe and Door- 
“keeper of Osiris, grant that (10) Imay come, I have 
“become a spirit, I have been judged, I have become a 
“divine being, I have come, and I have avenged mine 
“own body. Ihave taken up my seat by the divine 
“birth-chamber (11) of Osiris, and I have destroyed 
“the sickness and suffering which were there. I have 
“become mighty, and I have become a divine being 
“by the side of the birth-chamber of Osiris, I am 
“brought forth with him, I renew my youth, (12) I 
“renew my youth, I take possession of my two thighs 
“which are in the place where is Osiris, and I open 
“the mouth of the gods therewith, I take my seat by 
“his side, and Thoth cometh forth, (13) and [I am| 
“strengthened in heart with thousands of cakes upon 
“the altars (14) of my divine father, and with my 
“beasts, and with my cattle, and with my red feathered 
‘‘fowl, (15) and with my oxen, and with my geese, and 
“with my ducks, for Horus my Chieftain, and with the 
“offerings which I make to Thoth, and with the sacri- 
“fices which I offer up to An-heri-ertitsa.” 


236 OF COMING FORTH BY DAY [Chap. Ixx. 


CHAPTER LXxX. 


[From the Papyrus of Mes-em-neter (Naville, op. cit., Bd. I. 
Bl. 82).] 


Vignette : This Chapter is without a vignette both in the 
Theban and Saite Recensions of the Book of the Dead. 


Text: (1) ANOTHER CHAPTER. 


“T have sacrificed unto An-heri-ertitsa, and IT am 
“decreed to be strengthened in heart, for I have made 
“offerings at the altars of my divine father (2) Osiris ; 
“Trule in Tattu and I lift myself up over his land. 
‘“T sniff the wind of the east by its hair; I lay hold 
‘upon the north wind by its (8) hair; I seize and hold 
“fast to the west wind by its body, and I go round 
“about heaven on its four sides; I lay hold upon the 
“south wind by (4) its eye, and I bestow air upon the 
“venerable beings [who are in the underworld] along 
“with the eating of cakes,” 


RUBRIC: If this composition be known [by the deceased] 
(5) upon earth he shall come forth by day, and he shall have 
the faculty of travelling about among the living, and his name 
shall never perish, 


ho 
Oo 
Ny 


Chap. Ixxi. 3] OF COMING FORTH BY DAY 


CHAPTER LXXI. 


[From the Papyrus of Nebseni (Brit. Mus. No. 9900, sheet 16). ] 


Vignette : The deceased kneeling, with both hands raised in 

adoration, before the goddess Meh-urt; the legend reads: 

“the homage of the scribe Nebseni to the goddess Meh-urt, 

lady of heaven, and mistress of earth.” Elsewhere (Naville, 

op. cit., Bd. I. Bl. 83) the deceased is seen adoring Ra alone, 
or Ra in the presence of Thoth and Osiris. 


Text: (1) THE CHAPTER OF COMING FORTH BY 
pAy. The libationer, the lord of reverence, Nebseni, 
saith :— 

“ Hail, thou hawk who risest in heaven, thou lord of 
“the goddess Meh-urt! (2) Strengthen thou me ac- 
“cording as thou hast strengthened thyself, and show 
“thyself upon the earth, O thou that returnest and 
“ withdrawest thyself, and let thy will be done.” 

“Behold the god of One Face (3) is with me. [I 
“‘am| the hawk which is within the shrine; and I open 


238 OF COMING FORTH BY DAY (Chap. Ixxi. 3 


“that which is upon the hangings thereof, Behold 
“ Horus, the son of Isis.” 

“{Behold] Horus the son of Isis! (4) Strengthen 
“thou me, according as thou hast strengthened thyself, 
“and show thyself upon earth, O thou that returnest 
“and withdrawest thyself, and let thy will be done.” 

“Behold, (5) the god of One Face is with me. [I 
“am]| the hawk in the southern heaven, and [I am] 
“Thoth in the northern heaven; I make peace with 
“the raging fire and I bring Maat (6) to him that 
“loveth her.” 

“Behold Thoth, even Thoth! Strengthen thou me 
“according as thou hast strengthened thyself, and 
“shew thyself upon earth, O thou that returnest and 
(7) withdrawest thyself, and let thy will be done.” 

“Behold the god of One Face is with me. I am the 
“Plant (8) of the region where nothing sprouteth, and 
“the blossom of the hidden horizon.” 

‘Behold Osiris, yea Osiris! Strengthen thou me 
“according as thou hast strengthened thyself, (9) and 
“show thyself upon earth, O thou that returnest and 
‘withdrawest thyself, and let thy will be done.” 

“Behold, the god of One Face (10) is with me. 
“Hail, thou who [standest] upon thy legs; in thine 
“hour,” or (as others say), “Hail, thou who art 
‘victorious upon thy legs, in thine (11) hour, thou 
“Jord of the divine T'win-gods,' who livest [in] the 


1 T.e., the souls of Horus and Ra; see Chapter XVIL., 1, 110 ff. 


Chap. Ixxi. 19] OF COMING FORTH BY DAY 239 


“divine Twin-gods, strengthen thou me according as 
“thou hast strengthened thyself, and-(12) show thyself 
“upon earth, O thou that returnest and withdrawest 
“thyself, and let thy will be done.” 

“Behold, the god of One Face is with me. (13) 
“Hail, thou Nekhen who art in thine egg, thou lord 
“of the goddess Meh-urt, strengthen thou me accord- 
“jing as thou hast strengthened thyself, (14) and show 
“thyself upon earth, O thou that returnest and with- 
“ drawest thyself, and let thy will be done.” 

“Behold, the god of One Face is with (15) me. 
“The god Sebek hath stood up within his ground, 
“and the goddess Neith hath stood up within her 
“plantation, O thou that returnest and withdrawest 
“(16) thyself, show thyself upon earth and let thy 
“will be done.” 

“Behold, the god of One Face is with me. Hail, ye 
“Seven Beings! who make decrees, who (17) support 
“the Scales on the night of the judgment of the 
“ Utchat, who cut off heads, who hack necks in 
“pieces, who take possession of hearts by violence 
“and rend the places (18) where hearts are fixed, 
“who make slaughterings in the Lake of Fire, I 
“know you and I know your names, therefore know 
“ye me even as (19) I know your names. I come 
“forth to you, therefore come ye forth to me, for ye 

1 These are the seven Spirits whose names are given in Chapter 
XVILI., line 103 ff.; they are related in some way to the goddess 


Meh-urt, who is identified with the Eye of Ra, and some would see 
in them the Seven Stars of the constellation of the Great Bear. 


240 OF COMING FORTH BY DAY (Chap. Ixxi, 22 


“live in me and I would live in you. Make ye me to 
“De vigorous by means of that which is in your hands, 
“that is to say, by the rod of power which is (20) in 
“your hands. Decree ye for me life by [your] speech 
“year by year; give me multitudes of years over and 
“above my years of life, and multitudes of months over 
“and above my months (21) of life, and multitudes of 
“days over and above my days of life, and multitudes 
‘of nights over and above my nights of life; and grant 
“that I may come forth and shine upon my statue ; 
“and [grant me] (22) air for my nose, and let my eyes 
“have the power to see among those divine beings who 
“dwell in the horizon on the day when evil-doing and 
“wrong are justly assessed.” 

RUBRIC: If this chapter be recited for the deceased he 
shall be strong upon earth before Ra, and he shall have a 
comfortable burial (07 tomb) with Osiris, and it shall be of 
great benefit to a man in the underworld. Sepulchral bread 
shall be given unto him, and he shall come forth into the 


presence [of Ra] day by day, and every day, regularly, and 
continually.! 


1 This Rubric is taken from the Papyrus of Thenna (see Naville, 
op. cit., Bd. II. p. 153). 


Ch, Ixxii, 3] OF PASSING THROUGH THE TOMB 241 


CHAPTER LXXII. 


[From the Papyrus of Nebseni (Brit. Mus. No. 9900, sheet 3). ] 


From the Papyrus of Nebseni. From the Brocklehurst Papyrus, 


Vignette : The deceased standing and holding a staff in his 

left hand; or, the deceased standing before a funeral chest: 

or, the deceased kneeling in adoration before a ram-headed 

god; or, the deceased adoring three gods, who either sit on or 
stand in a shrine. 


Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF COMING FORTH BY 
DAY AND OF OPENING UP A WAY THROUGH THE 
Amenet.! Behold the scribe Nebseni, triumphant, 
who saith :— 

“Homage to you, O ye lords of Kas, ye who are 
“without (2) sin and who live for the limitless and 
‘infinite aeons of time which make up eternity, I 
“have opened up a way for myself to you! I have 
“become a spirit (3) in my forms, I have gained the 
“mastery over my enchantments, and [ am decreed 


! A section of the underworld, or of the tomb. 


VOL, II, C 


242 OF PASSING THROUGH THE TOMB (Ch, Ixxii..4 


“to be a spirit; (4) therefore deliver ye me from the 
“crocodile [which liveth in] this country of right 
“and truth. Grant ye to me my mouth that I may 
“speak therewith, (5) and cause that my sepulchral 
‘“‘meals be placed in my hands in your presence, for I 
“know you, and I know (6) your names, and I know 
“also the name of the mighty god, before whose nose 
“ve set your celestial food; and his name is ‘Tekem,’ 
“(7) [When] he openeth up his path in the eastern 
“horizon of heaven, and [when] he fluttereth down in 
“‘the western horizon of heaven (8), may he carry me 
“along with him and may I be safe and sound! Let 
“not the Mesget’ make an end of me, let not the Fiend 
“oain the mastery (9) over me, let me not be turned 
“back at your portals, and (10) let not your doors be 
“shut in my face, because my cakes are in the city of 
“Pe and my ale is in (11) the city of Tep. And there, 
“in the celestial mansions of heaven which my divine 
“father Tem hath stablished, let my hands lay hold 
(12) upon the wheat and the barley which shall be 
‘“‘oiven unto me therein in abundant measure, and may 
“the son of mine own body make [ready] for me my 
‘food therein, And grant ye unto me therein sepul- 
‘“‘chral meals, and incense, and wax, and all the heau- 
“tiful and (13) pure things whereon the god liveth, in 
“very deed for ever in all (14) the transformations 
“which it pleaseth me [to perform]; and grant me 


1 A place where tortures are inflicted on the enemies of Ra. 


Ch. Ixxii, Rubric] OF PASSING THROUGH THE TOMB 243 


“the power to float down and to sail up the stream 
“in Sekhet-Aarru [and may I reach Sekhet-hetep !] 
“ (15) Iam the double Lion-god.” 


RUBRIC!: (1) If (2) this chapter be known [by the deceased ] 
upon earth, [or if it be done] in writing upon [his] coffin, he 
shall come forth by (3) day in all the forms which he is pleased 
[to take], and he shall enter in to [his] place and shall not be 
driven back. (4) And cakes, and ale, and joints of meat upon 
the altar of Osiris shall be given unto him; and he shall enter 
(5) in peace into Sekhet-aarru to know the decree of him who 
dwelleth in Tattu; (6)there shall wheat and barley be given unto 
him; there shall he flourish as he did (7) upon earth; and he 
shall do whatsoever it pleaseth him to do, even as the company 
of the gods which is in (8) the underworld, continually, and 
regularly, for millions of times. 


CHAPTER LXXIII. 
[See Chapter IX., Papyrus of Ani (Brit. Mus. No. 10,470, sheet 18). ] 


This Chapter is given twice in the Turin Papyrus 
(see Lepsius, op. cit., Bll. 3 and 27); once with a 
vignette and once without; the vignette in the 
Theban Recension is quite different from that in 
the Saite Recension, where the deceased is seen 
standing and holding a staff in his left hand. 


1 From the Papyrus of Ani (Brit. Mus. No, 10,470, sheet 6). 


244 OF LIFTING UP THE FEEE { Chap. Ixxiv, 1 


CHAPTER LXXIV. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 6). ] 


Dy 


rie 


iL, 


! gig): 
pat | +I 


Vignette : The deceased kneeling, with both hands raised in 

adoration, before the Hennu boat of the god Seker which is 

placed upon its sledge (Papyrus of Ani, sheet 18). In the 

Saite Recension the deceased is standing near a two-legged 
serpent (Lepsius, op. ezt., Bl. 27). 


Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF LIFTING UP THE FEET 
AND OF COMING FORTH UPON THE EARTH. (2) The 
overseer of the house of the overseer of the seal, Nu, 
triumphant, saith :— 

“Perform thy work, O Seker,' perform thy work, O 
“Seker, O thou [who dwellest in thy house], and who 
“Tstandest| on [thy] feet in the underworld! I am the 
“ood who sendeth forth rays of light over the Thigh of 


1 A name of Osiris as the god who was ‘‘ closed up” or ‘shunt 


up” in his coffin. 


Chap. Ixxv. 2] OF JOURNEYING TO ANNU 245 


(3) heaven, and I come forth to heaven and I sit 
“myself down by the God of Light (Khu). Hail, I 
“have become helpless! Hail, I have become help- 
“less! but I go forward. I have become helpless, I 
“have become helpless (4) in the regions of those who 
“plunder in the underworld.” 


CHAPTER LXXV. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 13). ] 


Vignette: In the Theban Recension the deceased, holding a 

staff, is seen standing before a pylon of a temple; but in the 

Saite Recension he is standing before the emblem of Annu 
(Heliopolis) (Lepsius, op. cit., Bl. 28). 


Text: (1) Tue Cuaprer or gourneyinc To Annu 
(HELIOPOLIS) AND OF RECEIVING A THRONE THEREIN. 
The overseer of the house of the overseer of the seal, 
Nu, triumphant, saith :—(2) 


“T have come forth from the uttermost parts of the 


246 OF JOURNEYING TO ANNU [Chap. Ixxv. 3 


“earth, and [I have] received my apparel (?) at the 
“will (?) of the Ape. I penetrate into the holy habita- 
‘‘tions of those who are in [their] shrines (07 coffins), 
(3) I force my way through the habitations of the god 
“Remrem, and I arrive in the habitations of the god 
“‘ Akhsesef, I travel on through the holy chambers, and 
“T pass into the Temple of the god (4) Kemkem. The 
“Buckle hath been given unto me, it [hath placed] its 
“hands upon me, it hath decreed [to my service] its 
“sister Khebent, and its mother Kehkehet. It placeth 
“me (5) in [the eastern part of heaven wherein Ra 
“viseth and is exalted every day; and I rise therein 
“and travel onward, and I become a spiritual body 
“(sih) like the god, and they set me]! (6) on that 
“holy way on which Thoth journeyeth when he goeth 
“to make peace between the two Fighting-gods (i.e., 
‘Horus and Set). He journeyeth, he journeyeth to 
“the city of Pe, and he cometh to the city of Tepu.” 


' The words in brackets are supplied from Nayille, op. cit., 
Bd. II. p. 158. 


Chap. Ixxvi. 2] THE TRANSFORMATIONS 247 


CHAPTER LXXVI. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 9). ] 


Vignette ; This Chapter is without a vignette in the Theban 
Recension, but in the Saite Recension a figure of the deceased 
is given above the Chapter (see Lepsius, op. cit., Bl. 87). 


Text: (1) Tue CHAPTER OF A MAN TRANSFORMING 
HIMSELF INTO WHATEVER HE PLEASETH. (2) The over- 
seer of the house of the overseer of the seal, Nu, 
triumphant, saith :— 

“T have come into the House of the King by means 
“of the mantis! (abit) which led me hither. Homage 


1 T.e., the ‘‘ praying pavtis,” t.e., ‘‘diviner,” or ‘‘soothsayer” 


(Mantis religiosw), an insect of the Mantidae class. Its hips are 
greatly elongated, and the thigh bears on its curved underside a 
channel armed on each side by strong movable spines. Into this 
channel the stout shin bone is capable of closing like the blade of a 
pen-knife, its sharp serrated edges being able to cut and hold. 
With its head raised upon the much-elongated and semi-erect 
prothorax, and with the half-opened forelimbs held outwards in 
the characteristic devotional attitude, it rests motionless upon the 
four posterior limbs waiting for prey, or occasionally stalks it with 
slow and silent movements, finally seizing it with its knife blades 
and devouring it. This insect was greatly honoured in Egypt and 
Nubia, and the Greeks attributed to it supernatural powers ; the 
Arabs, who call it ‘‘ marka‘” or ‘‘ masgad,” declare that it always 
prays with its head turned towards Mecca ! 


248 THE TRANSFORMATION INTO [Chap. Ixxvi. 3 


“to thee, (8) O thou who fliest into heaven, and dost 
“shine upon the son of the white crown, and dost 
‘protect the white crown, let me have my existence 
“with thee! I have gathered together the great 
“ood|s], I am mighty, I have made my way and I 
“have travelled along thereon.” 


CHAPTER LXXVIL. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 10). ] 


Vignette: A golden hawk, holding a flail, emblematic of rule 
(see Papyrus of Ani, sheet 25). 


Text: (1) Ture CHAPTER OF PERFORMING THE TRANS- 
FORMATION INTO A HAWK OF GOLD, The overseer of 


Chap. lxxvii. 10] A HAWK OF GOLD 249 


the house of the overseer of the seal, Nu, triumphant, 
saith :—(2) 

“T have risen, I have risen like the mighty hawk [of 
“oold] that cometh forth from his egg ; I fly (3) and I 
“alight like the hawk which hath a back four cubits 
“wide, and the wings of which are like unto the 
“mother-of-emerald of the south. (4) I have come 
‘from the interior of the Sektet boat, and my heart 
“hath been brought unto me from the mountain of 
“the east. I have alighted (5) upon the Afet boat, 
‘and those who were dwelling in their companies have 
“been brought unto me, and they bowed low in paying 
“(6) homage unto me and in saluting me with cries of 
“joy. I have risen, and I have gathered myself to- 
“oether like the beautiful hawk (7) of gold, which 
“hath the head of a Bennu bird, and Ra entereth in 
“day by day to hearken unto my words; I have taken 
“my seat among those (8) first-born gods of Nut. I 
‘am stablished, and the divine Sekhet-hetep is before 
(9) me, I have eaten therein, I have become a spirit 
“therein, I have an abundance therein—as much as I 
“desire—the god Nepra hath given to me my throat, 
“and I have gained the mastery over (10) that which 
“ouardeth (or belongeth to) my head.” 


THE TRANSFORMATION INTO [Chap, Ixxviii. x 


iS) 
On 
o) 


CHAPTER LXXVIIL. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheets 13 and 14). ] 


Vignette : A hawk, painted green, holding a flail, and standing 
upon a pylon-shaped pedestal (see Papyrus of Ani, sheet 25), 


Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF MAKING THE TRANS- 
FORMATION INTO A DIVINE HAWK. ‘The overseer of 
the house of the overseer of the seal, Nu, triumphant, 
saith :— 

“Hail, Great God, come now (2) to Tattu! Make 
“thou smooth for me the ways and let me go round 
“about [to visit] my thrones; I have renewed (?) 
“myself, and I have raised myself up. O grant thou 
*“that I may be feared, (3) and make thou me to be a 
“terror. Let the gods of the underworld be afraid of 
‘‘me, and may they fight for me in their habitations 


Chap. Ixxviii, 11] A DIVINE HAWK 251 


“which are therein. (4) Let not him that would do 


= 


“me harm draw nigh unto me, or injure (?) me, in the 
“House of Darkness, that. is, he that clotheth and 
“covereth the feeble one, and whose [name] is 
“hidden; (5) and let not the gods act likewise 
“towards me. [Hail], ye gods, who hearken unto 
“Tlmy] speech! Hail, ye rulers, who are among the 
“followers of Osiris! Be ye therefore silent, O ye 
“gods, (6) when one god speaketh unto another, for he 
“hearkeneth unto right and truth; and what I speak 
“unto [him] do thou also speak for me then, O Osiris. 
“Grant thou that I may journey round about |[accord- 
“ing to] that which cometh forth from my mouth 
“concerning me, (7) and grant that I may see thine 
“own Form (or forms), and the dispositions of thy 
“Souls. Grant thou that I may come forth, and that 
“T may have power over my legs, and that I may have 
“my existence there like (8) unto that of Neb-er-tcher 
“who is over [all]. May the gods of the underworld 
“fear me, and may they fight for me in their habi- 
“tations, Grant thou that I may move along therein 
“(9) together with the divine beings who journey 
“onwards, and may I be stablished upon my resting- 
“place like the Lord of Life. May I be joined unto 
“Tsis the divine lady, and may she protect me (10) 
“from him that would do an injury unto me; and let 
“not any one come to see the divine one naked and 
“helpless. May I journey on, may I come into the 
“uttermost (11) parts of heaven. I exchange speech 


52 THE TRANSFORMATION INTO [Chap. Ixxviii. 12 


“with the god Seb, I make supplication for divine 
“food from Neb-er-tcher ; the gods of the underworld 
“have fear of me, and they (12) fight for me in their 
“habitations when they see that thou hast provided 
“me with food, both of the fowl of the air and of the 
“fish of the sea. Iam one of those Khus who dwell 
“with (13) the divine Khu, and I have made my form 
“like unto his divine Form, when he cometh forth and 
“maketh himself manifest in Tattu. [I am] a spiritual 
“body (sah) (14) and possess my soul, and will speak 
“unto thee the things which concern me. O grant 
“thou that I may be feared, and make thou me to be 
“a terror; let the gods of the underworld be afraid of 
“me, (15) and may they fight for me in their habita- 
“tions. I, even I, am the Khu who dwelleth with the 
“divine Khu, whom the god Tem himself hath created, 
“(16) and who hath come into being from the blossom, 
“(c.e., the eyelashes) of his eye; he hath made to have 
“existence, and he hath made to be glorious (t.e., to be 
“ Thus), and he hath made mighty thereby those who 
“have their existence along with him. Behold, he is 
“the only One in Nu, (17) and they sing praises (or 
‘“‘do homage) unto him [when] he cometh forth from 
“the horizon, and the gods and the Khus who have 
“come into being along with him ascribe [the lordship 
of] terror unto him.” 

“Tam one of those worms (?) which the eye of the 
“Lord, the only One, (18) hath created. And behold, 
‘““when as yet Isis had not given birth to Horus, I had 


Chap. Ixxviii. 25] A DIVINE HAWK 253 


“oerminated, and had flourished, and I had become 
“aged, (19) and I had become greater than those who 
“dwelt with the divine Khu, and who had come into 
“being along with him. And TI had risen up like the 
“divine hawk, and Horus made for me a spiritual body 
“(20) containing his own soul, so that I might take 
“possession of all that belonged unto Osiris in the 
“underworld. The double Lion-god, the governor of 
“the things which belong to the Temple of the nemmes 
“crown, (21) who dwelleth in his secret abode, saith 
“Tunto me] :—‘ Get thee back to the uttermost parts of 
“heaven, for behold, inasmuch as through thy form of 
“Horus thou hast become a spiritual body (sd@h) the 
“nemmes crown is not for thee; but (22) behold, 
“thou hast the power of speech even to the uttermost 
“parts of heaven. And I, the guardian, took posses- 
“sion of the things of Horus [which belonged] unto 
“ Osiris in the underworld, and Horus told aloud unto 
“me (23) the things which his divine father Osiris 
“spake unto him in years [gone by] on the day of his 
“own burial. I have given unto thee! the nemmes 
“crown through the double Lion-god that thou mayest 
“pass onward (24) and mayest come to the heavenly 
“path, and that those who dwell in the uttermost 
“parts of the horizon may see thee, and that the 
“gods of the underworld may see thee and may fight 
“for thee (25) in their habitations. And of them is 


1 Literally, ‘‘ Thou hast given unto me.” 


254 THE TRANSFORMATION INTO _  [Chap. Ixxviii, 26 


“ Aahet.! The gods, each and all of them, who are 
“the warders of the shrine of the Lord, the only one, 
“have fallen before my words.” 

“Hail! (26) He that is exalted upon his tomb is on 
“my side, and he hath bound [upon my head] the 
‘““nemmes crown, by the decree of the double Lion-god 
“on my behalf, and the god Aahet hath prepared a 
“way forme. I, even I, am exalted (27) in my tomb, 
“and the double Lion-god hath bound the nemmes 
‘crown upon my [head], and he hath also given unto 
‘‘me the double hairy covering of my head. He hath 
“stablished my heart through his own backbone, he 
‘hath stablished my heart through his own (28) great 
“and exceeding strength, and I shall not fall through 
“Shu. I make my peace with the beautiful divine 
‘Brother, the lord of the two uraei, adored be he! 
“JT, even I, am he who knoweth the roads through 
“the sky (29), and the wind thereof is in my body. 
“The bull which striketh terror [into men| shall not 
“drive me back, and I shall pass on to the place where 
“lieth the ship-wrecked mariner on the border of the 
“Sekhet-neheh (.e., Field of illimitable time), (30) 
“and I shall journey on to the night and sorrow of 
“the regions of Amenti. 

“O Osiris, I shall come each day into the House of 
“the double Lion-god, and I shall come forth there- 


1 The variants are Aahet At, Aahet Ateh, and one papyrus gives 
the words: ‘‘I am the great god”; see Naville, op. cit., Bd, II, 
p- 167. 


Chap, Ixxviil. 37] A DIVINE HAWK 25 


OL 


“from into the House of (31) Isis, the divine lady. I 
“shall behold sacred things which are hidden, and I 
“shall be led on to the secret and holy things, even as 
“they have granted unto me (32) to see the birth of 
“the Great God. Horus hath made me to be a spiritual 
“body through his soul, [and I see what is therein. If 
“T speak near the mighty ones of Shu they repulse my 
“opportunity. I am the guardian and I] take posses- 
“sion of the things which Horus had from Osiris in 
“the underworld, I, even I, (83) am Horus who 
“dwelleth in the divine Khu. [I] have gained power 
“over his crown, I have gained power over his radiance, 
“and I have travelled over the remote, illimitable 
“parts of (84) heaven. Horus is upon his throne, 
“Horus is upon his royal seat. My face is like 
“unto that of the divine hawk, my strength is like 
“unto that of the divine hawk, and I am one who 
“hath been fully equipped by his divine Lord. I 
“shall come forth to Tattu, (85) I shall see Osiris, I 
“shall pay homage to him on the right hand and on 
“the left, I shall pay homage unto Nut, and she shall 
“Jook upon me, and the gods shall look upon me, 
“tooether with the Hye of Horus who (36) is without 
“sight (?) They (i.e., the gods) shall make their arms 
“to come forth unto me. I rise up [as] a divine 
“Power, and [I] repulse him that would subject me to 
“restraint. They open unto me the holy paths, they 
‘see (37) my form, and they hear that which I speak.” 

“!Down] upon your faces, ye gods of the Tuat 


256 THE TRANSFORMATION INTO (Chap. Ixxviii, 38 


“ (underworld), who would resist me with your faces 
“and oppose me with your powers, who lead along 
“the stars which never (38) rest, and who make the 
“holy paths unto the Hemati abode [where is] the 
“Tord of the exceedingly mighty and terrible Soul. 
“Horus hath commanded that ye lift up your faces 
“so that I may (39) look upon you. I have risen 
“up like the divine hawk, and Horus hath made for 
“me a spiritual body, through his own soul, to take 
“possession of that which belongeth to Osiris (40) in 
“the Tuat (underworld). I have bound up the gods 
“with divine tresses, and [ have travelled on to those 
“who ward their Chambers, and who were on both 
“sides of me. I have made my roads and I have (41) 
“journeyed on and have reached those divine beings 
“who inhabit their secret dwellings, and who are 
“warders of the Temple of Osiris. I have spoken 
“unto them with strength, and have made them to 
“know (42) the most mighty power of him that is 
“provided with two horns [to fight] against Suti; 
“and I make them to know concerning him that hath 
“taken possession of the divine food, and who is pro- 
“vided with the Might of Tem. (43) May the gods of 
“the underworld [order] a prosperous journey for me ! 
“OQ ye gods who inhabit your secret dwellings, and 
‘who are warders of the Temple of Osiris, and whose 
“numbers are great and multitudinous, grant ye (44) 
“that I may come unto you. I have bound up and I 
“have gathered together the powers of Kesemu-enenet,” 


Chap. Ixxviii. 52] A DIVINE HAWK 257 


or (as others say), ‘‘ Kesemiu-enenet ; and I have made 
“holy (45) the Powers of the paths of those who watch 
“and ward the roads of the horizon, and who are the 
“ouardians of the horizon of Hemati which is in 
“heaven. I have stablished habitations for Osiris, I 
“have made the ways holy (46) for him, I have done 
“that which hath been commanded, I have come forth 
“to Tattu, I have seen Osiris, I have spoken unto him 
“concerning the matters of his first-born son whom 
“*(47) he loveth and concerning the wounding of the 
“heart of Suti, and I have seen the divine one who is 
“without life. Yea, I have made them to know con- 
“cerning the counsels of the gods which Horus carried 
“out (48) while his father Osiris was not [with him], 
“Hail, Lord, thou most mighty and terrible Soul! 
“ Verily I, even I, have come, look thou upon me, (49) 
“and do thou make me to be exalted. I have made my 
“way through thy Tuat (underworld), and I have 
“opened up the paths which belong to heaven and 
“also those which belong to earth, and I have suf: 
“fered no opposition therein. (50) Exalted [be thou] 
“upon thy throne, O Osiris! Thou hast heard fair 
“things, O Osiris! Thy strength is vigorous, O Osiris. 
“Thy head is fastened unto thee, O Osiris. Thy brow 
“is stablished, (51) O Osiris. Thy heart is glad, [O 
“QOsiris|. Thy speech (?) is stablished, [O Osiris], and 
“thy princes rejoice, Thou art stablished like the 
“Bull of Amentet. (52) Thy son Horus hath risen 
“Jike the sun upon thy throne, and all life is with 
VOL, II, D 


258 TRANSFORMATION INTO THE [Chap, Ixxviii. 53 


“him. Millions of years minister unto him, and 
‘millions of years hold him in fear; the company 
“of the gods are his servants, and the company of 
“the gods hold him in fear. The god Tem, (53) 
“the Governor and only One of the gods, hath 
“spoken [these things], and his word passeth not 
“away. Horus is both the divine food and the 
“sacrifice. [He] hath passed on (?) to gather to- 
“oether [the members of] his divine father (54) ; 
“Horus is [his] deliverer, Horus is [his] deliverer. 
‘Horus hath sprung from the water of his divine 
“father and [from his] decay. He hath become the 
“Governor of Egypt. The gods labour for him, and 
“they toil for him for (55) millions of years; and he 
‘hath made to live millions of years through his Hye, 
“the only One of its Lord (ov Neb-s), Nebt-er-tcher.” 


CHAPTER LXXIX. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheets 8 and 9). ] 


Vignette: The deceased, or his soul, in adoration before 
three gods (see Naville, op. cit., Bd. I, Bl. 90). 


Ch. Ixxix. 8] GOVERNOR OF THE SOVEREIGN PRINCES 259 


Text: (1) THE CHAPTER OF BEING TRANSFORMED 
INTO THE GOVERNOR OF THE SOVEREIGN PRINCES. 
The overseer of the house of the overseer of the seal, 
Nu, triumphant, saith :— (2) 

“T am the god Tem, the maker of heaven, the creator 
“of things which are, who cometh forth from the earth, 
“who maketh to come into being the seed which is 
“sown, the lord of things which shall be, who gave 
“birth to the gods; [I am] the great god who made 
“himself, (3) the lord of life, who maketh to flourish 
“the company of the gods. Homage to you, O ye 
“Jords of divine things (or of creation), ye pure beings 
“whose abodes are hidden! Homage to you, O ye 
“everlasting lords, (4) whose forms are hidden and 
“whose shrines are hidden in places which are un- 
“known! Homage to you (5) O ye gods, who dwell 
“in the Tenait (?)! Homage to you, O ye gods of the 
“circuit of the flooded lands of Qebhu! Homage to 
“you, O ye gods who live in Amentet! (6) Homage 
“to you, O ye company of the gods who dwell in Nut! 
“Grant ye that I may come unto you, for I am pure, 
“(7) I am divine, 1 am a khu, I am strong, I am 
“endowed with a soul (ov I am mighty), and I have 
“brought unto you incense, and sweet-smelling gums, 
‘and natron ; I have made an end of the spittle which 
“floweth (8) from your mouth upon me. I have come, 
“and I have made an end of the evil things which are 
“in your hearts, and I have removed the faults which 
“ve kept [laid up against me]. I have brought to you 


260 TRANSFORMATION INTO THE GOD WHO [Ch. Ixxix. 9 


(9) the things which are good, and I make to come 
‘into your presence Right and Truth. J, even I, know 
“you, and I know your names, and I know (10) your 
“forms, which are unknown, and I come into being 
“along with you. My coming is like unto that of the 
“ood who eateth men and (11) who liveth upon the 
“oods. Iam mighty with you like the god who is 
“exalted upon his resting-place ; the gods come to me 
“in gladness, and goddesses make supplication (12) 
“unto me when they see me. I have come unto you, 
“and I have risen like your two divine daughters. I 
“have taken my seat in the (18) horizon, and I receive 
‘‘my offerings upon my tables, and I drink drink-offer- 
“ings at eventide. My coming is [received] with (14) 
“shouts of joy, and the divine beings who dwell in the 
‘horizon ascribe praises unto me, the divine spiritual 
“body (Sah), the lord of divine beings (15). I am 
‘exalted like the holy god who dwelleth in the Great 
“Temple, and the gods rejoice when they see me in 
“my beautiful coming forth from the body of Nut, 
“when my mother Nut giveth birth unto me,” 


Ch, Ixxx. 4] GIVETH LIGHT IN THE DARKNESS 201 


CHAPTER LXXxX. 


[From the Papyrus of Ani (Brit. Mus. No. 10,470, sheet 28). ] 


Vignette: A god with the disk of the sun upon his head. 


Text: (1) [THe CHAPTER OF] MAKING THE TRANS- 
FORMATION INTO THE GOD WHO GIVETH LIGHT [IN| 
THE DARKNESS. Saith Osiris, the scribe Ani, trium- 
phant :-— 


“T am (2) the girdle of the robe of the god Nu, 
“which shineth and sheddeth light upon that which 
“Dbelongeth to his breast, which sendeth forth light 
“into the darkness, which uniteth the two fighting 
“deities (8) who dwell in my body through the mighty 
“spell of the words of my mouth, which raiseth up him 
“that hath fallen—(4) for he who was with him in the 


262 TRANSFORMATIONS INTO A LIGHT-GIVING [Ch. Ixxx. 5 


“valley of Abtu (Abydos) hath fallen—and I rest. I 
“have remembered him. I have taken possession of 
“the god Hu in my city, for I found (5) him therein, 
“and I have led away captive the darkness by my 
“might. Ihave rescued the Eye [of the Sun] when 
“it waned at the coming of the festival of the fifteenth 
“day, (6) and I have weighed Sut in the celestial 
“houses against the Aged One who is with him. I 
“have endowed (7) Thoth [with what is needful] in the 
“Temple of the Moon-god for the coming of the fifteenth 
“day of the festival. I have taken possession of the 
“Ureret crown; Maat (7.e., right and truth) is in my 
“(8) body; its mouths are of turquoise and rock- 
“crystal. My homestead is among the furrows which 
“are [of the colour of] lapis-lazuli. I am. (9) Elem- 
“Nu (?) who sheddeth light in the darkness. I 
“have come to give light in the darkness, which is 
“made light and bright [by me]. I have given light 
“in the darkness, (10) and I have overthrown the 
“destroying crocodiles. I have sung praises unto 
“those who dwell in the darkness, I have raised up 
“those who (11) wept, and who had hidden their faces 
“and had sunk down in wretchedness; and they did 
“look then upon me. [Hail, then,] ye beings, I am 
“Hem-Nu (?), and I will not let you hear concerning 
“the matter. [I] have opened [the way], I am Hem- 
“ Nu (?), I have made light the darkness, I have come, 
‘having made an end of the darkness, which hath 
“become light indeed.” 


Ch, Ixxxi.a, 2] GOD AND INTO A LOTUS 


CHAPTER LXXXIa, 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No, 10,477, sheet 11).] 


Vignette: In the Papyrus of Nebseni 

(sheet 3) the vignette of this Chapter is 

simply a lotus flower in full bloom, but in 

the Papyrus of Ani (sheet 28) a human head 

is seen springing from the lotus which is 

growing in a pool of water. See also 
Lepsius, op. c7t., Bl. 31. 


Text; (1) THE CHAPTER OF MAKING 
THE TRANSFORMATION INTO A LOTUS. 
The overseer of the house of the over- 
seer of the seal, Nu, begotten by the 
overseer of the house of the overseer of 
the seal, Amen-hetep, saith :— (2) 


“Tam the pure lotus which springeth 
“up from the divine splendour that be- 
“Jongeth to the nostrils of Ra. I have 
“made [my way], and I follow on seek- 
“ing for him who is Horus. I am the 
“pure one who cometh forth out of the 


volgen 


264 TRANSFORMATIONS INTO A LOTUS (Ch, Ixxxi.s. 


CHAPTER LXXXIb. 


[From the Papyrus of Paqrer (see Naville, op. cit., Bd. I. Bl. 93). ] 


Vignette: A human head springing from a lotus. 


Text: (1) THE CHAPTER OF MAKING THE TRANS- 
FORMATION INTO A LoTUS. Saith Osiris Paqrer :— (2) 


‘Hail, thou lotus, thou type of the god Nefer-Temu ! 
“T am the man that knoweth you, and (3) I know your 
“names among [those of] the gods, the lords of the 
“underworld, and I am one of (4) you. Grant ye that 
“{T] may see the gods who are the divine guides in the 
“Tuat (underworld), and grant ye unto me a place in 
(5) the underworld near unto the lords of Amentet. 
“Let me arrive at a habitation in the land of Tchesert, 


Ch, Ixxxii, r] AND INTO THE GOD PTAH 265 


“and receive me, O all ye gods, (6) in the presence of 
“the lords of eternity. Grant that my soul may come 
“forth whithersoever it pleaseth, and let it not be 
“driven away from the presence of the great company 
“of the gods,” 


OHAPTER LXXXII. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheets 9 and 10). ] 


Vignette: The god Ptah in a shrine, before which is a table 
of offerings. 


Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF MAKING THE TRANS- 
FORMATION INTO PTAH, OF EATING CAKES, AND OF 
DRINKING ALE, AND OF UNFETTERING THE STEPS, AND 
OF BECOMING A LIVING BEING IN ANNU (Heliopolis). 


266 TRANSFORMATIONS INTO THE GOD [Ch. Ixxxii. 2 


The overseer of the house of the overseer of the seal, 
Nu, triumphant, saith :— (2) 

“T fly like a hawk, I cackle like the smen goose, and 
“T perch (3) upon that abode of the underworld (dat) 
“on the festival of the great Being. That which is an 
“abomination unto me, that which is an abomination 
“unto me, I have not eaten; filth is an abomination 
“unto me and I have not eaten thereof, (4) and that 
“which is an abomination unto my /a hath not entered 
“into my belly. Let me, then, live upon that which 
“the gods and the Khus decree for me ; (5) let me live 
“and let me have power over cakes; let me eat them 
“before the gods and the Khus [who have a favour] 
“unto (6) me; let me have power over [these cakes] 
“and let me eat of them under the [shade of the] leaves 
‘of the palm tree of the goddess Hathor, (7) who is 
‘“‘my divine Lady. Let the offering of the sacrifice, 
“and the offering of cakes, and vessels of libations be 
‘made in Annu; let me clothe myself in (8) the fadu 
‘“oarment [which I shall receive] from the hand of the 
“ooddess Tait ; let me stand up and let me sit down 
(9) wheresoever I please. My head is like unto that 
“of Ra, and [when my members are] gathered together 
“{T am] like unto Tem; the four [sides of the domain] 
“of Ra, (10) and the width of the earth four times. I 
“come forth. My tongue is like unto that of Ptah, 
“and my throne is like unto that of the goddess 
“Hfathor, and I make mention of the words of Tem, 
“my father, (11) with my mouth. He it is who con- 


Ch, Ixxxii.13] PTAH AND INTO A LIVING BEING 267 


“straineth the handmaid, the wife of Seb, and before 
“him are bowed [all] heads, and there is fear of him. 
“Hymns of praise are repeated for [me] by reason of 
“(my | mighty acts, and I am decreed to be the divine 
(12) Heir of Seb, the lord of the earth, and to be the 
“protector therein. The god Seb refresheth me, and 
“he maketh his risings to be mine. Those who dwell 
“in Annu (13) bow down their heads unto me, for I 
“am their lord and Iam their bull. I am more power- 
“ful than the lord of time, and I shall enjoy the 
“pleasures of love, and shall gain the mastery over 
“millions of years.” 


268 THE TRANSFORMATION INTO  [Chap, Ixxxiii. 1 


CHAPTER LXXXITT 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 10). ] 


Vignette: A Bennu bird. 


Text: (1) [THE CHAPTER OF MAKING THE TRANS- 
FORMATION INTO (2) A Bennu Birp.| The overseer 
of the house of the overseer of the seal, Nu, trium- 
phant, saith :— (3) 


“T came? into being from unformed matter. I came 
“into existence like the god Khepera, I have ger- 
‘“minated like the things which germinate (7.e., plants), 

1 In the Papyrus of Nu the text which is given under the title of 
Chapter LX XXIII. is that of Chapter CXXIV.; Chapters LXXXIII. 


and LXXXIYV. are given under the title of Chapter LXXXIY. 
2 Literally, ‘‘I flew.” 


Chap, Ixxxiii, 7] A BENNU BIRD 269 


“and I have dressed myself like the (4) tortoise! I 
“am [of] the germs of every god. I am Yesterday of 
“the four [quarters of the world] and of those seven 
“Uraei which came into existence in Amentet, that is to 
“say, [Horus, who emitteth light from his divine body. 
“(5) He is] the god [who] fought against Suti, but the 
“god Thoth cometh between them through the judg- 
“ment of him that dwelleth in (6) Sekhem, and of the 
“ Souls who are in Annu, and there is a stream between 
“them. (7) I have come by day, and I have risen in 
“the footsteps of the gods. I am the god Khensu,’ 
“who driveth back all that oppose him.” 


RUBRIC: [If] this chapter [be known by the deceased] he 
shall come forth pure by day after his death, and he shall per- 
form whatsoever transformations his heart desireth. He shall 
be in the following of Un-nefer, and he shall be satisfied with 
the food of Osiris and with sepulchral meals. [He] shall see 
the disk, [he] shall be in good case upon earth before Ra, and 
he shall be triumphant before Osiris, and no evil thing what- 
soever shall have dominion over him for ever and ever. 


believe that ‘‘ Turtle” is the correct translation. 


ih 
2 T.e., the Moon-god. 


2709 THE TRANSFORMATION [Chap, Ixxxiv, 8 


CHAPTER LXXXIV. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 10). ] 


Vignette: A heron. 


Text : [THE CHAPTER OF MAKING THE TRANSFORMA- 
TION INTO A HERON. The overseer of the house of the 
overseer of the seal, Nu, triumphant, saith :—] (8) 


[I] have gotten dominion over the beasts that are 
“brought for sacrifice, with the knives which are 
“‘Theld] at their heads, and at their hair, and at their 
O10 \uoneteenesie mame [Hail], Aged ones [hail,] Khus, who 
‘are provided with the opportunity, the overseer of the 
“house of the overseer of the seal, Nu, triumphant, 
(10) is upon the earth, and what he hath slaughtered 
‘is in heaven; and what he hath slaughtered is in 


> 


Chap. Ixxxiv. 16] INTO A HERON 271 


“heaven and he is upon the earth. Behold, I am 
“strong, and I work mighty deeds to the very heights of 
“heaven. (11) I have made myself pure, and [I] make 
“the breadth of heaven [a place for] my footsteps [as I 
90] into the cities of Aukert; I advance, and I go 
“forward (12) into the city of Unnu (Hermopolis). I 
“have set the gods upon their paths, and I have 
“roused up the exalted ones who dwell in their 
“shrines. Do I not know Nu? (13) Do I not know 
“Ta-tunen? Do I not know the beings of the colour 
“of fire who thrust forward their horns? Do I not 
“know [every being having] incantations unto whose 
“words I listen? (14) I am the Smam bull [for 
slaughter] which is written down in the books. 
“The gods crying out say: ‘Let your faces be 
“oracious to him that cometh onward. The light (15) 
“is beyond your knowledge, and ye cannot fetter it; 
“and times and seasons are in my body. I do not 
“utter words to the god Hu,’ [i do not utter words of] 
‘wickedness instead of [words of] right and truth, (16) 
“and each day right and truth come upon my eyebrows. 
“At night taketh place the festival of him that is dead, 
“the Aged One, who is in ward [in] the earth.” 


1 The god who provides celestial food for the beatified. 


72, THE TRANSFORMATION (Chap, lxxxv. 1 


CHAPTER LXXXV, 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 9). ] 


UT eT 


From the Papyrus of Ani, 


Vignette: A soul, or a ram, the emblem of Osiris as Ba-Neb- 
Tattu, Ze. the “Soul, Lord of Tattu.” 


Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF MAKING THE TRANS- 
FORMATION INTO A LIVING SOUL, AND OF NOT ENTERING 


Chap, Ixxxv, 11] INTO A LIVING SOUL 273 


INTO THE CHAMBER OF TORTURE; whosoever knoweth 
[it] shall not see corruption, The overseer of the 
house of the overseer of the seal, Nu, triumphant, 
saith :— (2) 

“T am the divine Soul of Ra proceeding from the 
“ood Nu; that divine Soul which is God. [I am] 
“the creator of the divine food, and that which is an 
“abomination unto me is sin (3) whereon I look not. 
“T proclaim right and truth, and [ live therein. I 
“am the divine food, which is not corrupted in my 
“name (4) of Soul; I gave birth unto myself together 
“with Nuin my name of Khepera in whom I come 
“into being day by day. I am the lord of (5) light, 
“and that which is an abomination unto me is death ; 
“Jet me not go into the chamber of torture which is in 
“the Tuat (underworld), I ascribe honour [unto] 
“Osiris, and I make to be at peace the heart[s] 
“of (6) those beings who dwell among the divine 
“things which [I] love. They cause the fear of me 
“{to abound], and they create awe of (7) me in those 
“beings who dwell in their divine territories. Behold, 
“T am exalted upon my standard (8), and upon my 
“seat, and upon the throne which is adjudged [to me]. 
“T am the god Nu, and the workers of iniquity shall 
“not destroy me (9). I am the first-born god of 
“primeval matter, that is to say, the divine Soul, 
“even the (10) Souls of the gods of everlastingness, 
“and my body is eternity. My Form is everlasting- 
“ness, and is the lord of years (11) and the prince of 

VOL, Il. K 


274 THE TRANSFORMATION [Chap. Ixxxv. 12 


“eternity. [I am] the creator of the darkness who 
“maketh his habitation in the uttermost parts of the 
“sky, [which] I love, (12) and I arrive at the confines 
“thereof. I advance upon my feet, I become master 
“of (13) my vine, I sail over the sky which formeth 
“the division [betwixt heaven and earth], [I] destroy 
“the hidden (14) worms that travel nigh unto my foot- 
“steps which are towards the lord of the two hands 
“and arms. My soul is the Souls of the souls (15) of 
‘“everlastingness, and my body is eternity. I am the 
‘divine exalted being who is the lord of the land of 
“Tebu. ‘I am the Boy (16) in the city and the Young 
‘‘man in the plain’ is my name; ‘he that never 
‘suffereth corruption’ is my name. I am the Soul, 
“the creator of the god Nu who maketh his habitation 
“in (17) the underworld: my place of incubation is 
“unseen and my egg is not cracked. I have done 
“away with all my iniquity, and I shall see my divine 
“ Father, (18) the lord of eventide, whose body dwelleth 
“in Annu. I travel (?) to the god of night (?), who 
“ dwelleth with the god of light, by the western region 
“of the Ibis (7.e., Thoth),” 


Chap, Ixxxvi. 2] INTO A SWALLOW 275 


CHAPTER LXXXVI. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 10).] 


From the Papyrus of Nebseni., From the Papyrus of Ani, 


Vignette: A swallow perched upon either a rounded object 
or a tomb, 


Text: (1) THE CHAPTER OF MAKING THE TRANS- 
FORMATION INTO A SWALLOW. ‘The overseer of the 
house of the overseer of the seal, Nu, triumphant, 
saith :— (2) 

“T am a swallow, I am a swallow. I am the 
“ Scorpion, the daughter of Ra. Hail, ye gods, whose 
“scent is sweet; hail, ye gods, whose scent is sweet ! 


276 THE TRANSFORMATION INTO | [Chap. Ixxxvi. 3 


“{Hail,] Flame, which cometh forth from the horizon ! 
‘Hail, thou who art in the city, I have brought (3) the 
“Warden of his Bight therein. O stretch out unto me 
“thy hand so that I may be able to pass my days in the 
“Pool of Double Fire, and (4) let me advance with my 
“message, for I have come with words to tell. O open 
“{thou] the doors to me and I will declare the things 
“which have been (5) seen by me. Horus hath become 
“the divine prince of the Boat of the Sun, and unto him 
“hath been given the throne of his divine father Osiris, 
“and (6) Set, that son of Nut, [lieth] under the fetters 
“which he had made for me. I have made a computa- 
“tion of what is in the city of Sekhem, (7) I have 
“stretched out both my hands and arms at the word (?) 
“of Osiris, I have passed on to judgment, and I have 
“come that [I] may (8) speak ; grant that I may pass 
‘on and declare my tidings. I enter in, [I am] judged, 
“and [I] come forth worthy at (9) the gate of Neb-er- 
“tcher. Iam pure at the great place of the passage 
“of souls, I have done away with (10) my sins, I have 
“put away mine offences, and I have destroyed the evil 
“which appertained unto my members upon earth, 
“Hail, ye divine beings who guard the doors, make 
‘“‘ye for me (11) a way, for, behold, I am like unto 
“you. I have come forth by day, I have journeyed 
“on my legs, I have gained the mastery over my 
“footsteps [before] the God of Light, (12) I know 
“the hidden ways and the doors of the Sekhet-Aarru, 
“verily I, even I, have come, (13) I have overthrown 


Chap. Ixxxvii. 2] THE SERPENT SATA 2777 
“mine enemies upon earth, and yet my perishable 
“body is in the grave.” 

RUBRIC: If this chapter be known [by the deceased], he 
shall come forth by day, he shall not be turned back at (14) 


any gate in the underworld, and he shall make his transforma- 
tion into a swallow regularly and continually. 


CHAPTER LXXXVII. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 11).] 


Vignette: The serpent Sata with human legs. 


Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF MAKING THE TRANS- 
FORMATION INTO THE SERPENT Sata. ‘The overseer 
of the house of the overseer of the seal (2), Nu, 
triumphant, saith :— (3) 


278 TRANSFORMATION INTO A CROCODILE (Ch, Ixxxviii. 3 


“T am the serpent Sata whose years are many.’ I 
“die and I am born again each day. I am the serpent 
“Sata (4) which dwelleth in the uttermost parts of the 
“earth. I die, and I am born again, and I renew 
“myself, and I grow young (5) each day.” 


CHAPTER LXXXVIII. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 11). ] 


a 
COLT TTT TTT TTT TT Ty 


Vignette: A crocodile upon a pylon or gateway. 


Text: (1) THE CHAPTER OF MAKING THE TRANS- 
FORMATION INTO A CROCODILE. The overseer of the 


! Literally, “‘ dilated with years.” 


Ch, Ixxxix, 1] THE UNION OF SOUL AND BODY 279 


house of the overseer of the seal (2), Nu, triumphant, 
saith :— 

(3) Lam the divine crocodile which dwelleth in his 
“terror, I am the divine crocodile, and I seize [my 
“prey| like (4) a ravening beast. I am the great 
“and mighty Fish which is in the city of Qem-ur. 
“Tam (5) the lord to whom bowing and prostrations 
“are made in the city of Sekhem.” 


CHAPTER LXXXIX. 


[From the Papyrus of Ani (Brit. Mus. No. 10,470, sheet 17). ] 


Vignette: The mummy of the deceased lying upon a bier; 
above is his soul in the form of a human-headed bird, holding 
shen, the emblem of eternity, in its claws. 

Text: (1) Tue CHAPTER OF CAUSING THE SOUL TO 
BE UNITED TO ITS BODY IN THE UNDERWORLD. The 
Osiris Ani, triumphant, saith :— 


“Hail, thou god Anniu (i.c., Bringer)! Hail, thou 


280 THE UNION OF SOUL AND BODY (Ch. Ixxxix. 2 


“ood Pehrer (7.e., Runner), (2) who dwellest in thy hall! 
“THail,| great God! Grant thou that my soul may 
“come unto me from wheresoever it may be. If [it] 
“would tarry, then let my soul be brought (3) unto me 
“from wheresoever it may be, for thou shalt find the 
“Hye of Horus standing by thee like unto those beings 
“who are like unto Osiris, and who never lie down in 
“death. Let not (4) the Osiris Ani, triumphant, lie 
“down in death among those who lie down in Annu, 
“the land wherein souls are joined unto their bodies 
“even in thousands. Let me have possession of my 
“ba (soul), and of my khu, and let me triumph (5) 
“therewith in every place wheresoever it may be. 
“TObserve these things which [I] speak, for it hath 
“staves with it]'; observe then, O ye divine guar- 
‘“dians of heaven, my soul [wheresoever it may be]. 
“Tf it would (6) tarry, do thou make my soul to look 
‘upon my body,” for thou shalt find the Eye of Horus 
“standing by thee (7) like those [beings who are like 
“unto Osiris]. 

“Hail, ye gods, who tow along the boat of the lord 
“of millions of years, who bring [it] (8) above the 
“underworld and who make it to travel over Nut, who 
“make souls to enter into [their] spiritual bodies, (9) 
“whose hands are filled with your ropes and who clutch 
“your weapons tight, destroy ye (10) the Enemy; thus 


1 Added from the Papyrus of Nebseni. 
2 The Papyrus of Nebseni has: ‘‘make thou me to see my soul 
and my shade.” 


Ch. Ixxxix, 12] THE UNION OF SOUL AND BODY 281 


“shall the boat of the sun be glad and the great God 
“shall set out on his journey in peace. And behold, 
“orant ye that the soul of Osiris Ani, (11) triumphant, 
“may come forth before the gods and that it may be 
“triumphant along with you in the eastern part of the 
“sky to follow unto the place where it was yesterday ; 
“‘Tand that it may have] peace, peace in Amentet. (12) 
“May it look upon its material body, may it rest upon 
“its spiritual body ; and may its body neither perish 
“nor suffer corruption for ever.” 


RUBRIC: [These] words are to be said over a soul of gold 
inlaid with precious stones and placed on the breast of Osiris. 


CHAPTER XC. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 8). ] 


Vignette : A jackal walking towards the funeral mountain 

(see Naville, op. cit., Bd. I. Bl. 102), or the deceased standing 

upright in the presence of the god Thoth, who is about to give 
unto him a roll of papyrus (see Lepsius, op. cit., Bl. 33).§ 


282 OF DRIVING AWAY EVIL (Chap. xc. 1 


Text: (1) Tue CHAPTER OF DRIVING EVIL RECOL- 
LECTIONS FROM THE MOUTH. The overseer of the 
house of the overseer of the seal, Nu, triumphant, 
the son of the overseer of the house of the overseer 
of the seal, Amen-hetep, triumphant, saith :— (2) 

“ Hail, thou that cuttest off heads, and slittest brows, 
“thou being that puttest away the memory of evil 
“things from the mouth of the Khus by means of the 
“incantations which they have within them, look not 
“upon me with the [same] eyes (3) with which thou 
“lookest upon them. Go thou round about on thy 
“legs, and let thy face be [turned] behind thee so that 
“thou mayest be able to see the divine slaughterers of 
“the god Shu who are coming up (4) behind thee to 
“cut off thy head, and to slit thy brow by reason of the 
“message of violence [sent] by thy lord, and to see (?) 
“that which thou sayest. Work thou for me so that 
“the memory of evil things shall dart (5) from my 
“mouth ; let not my head be cut off; let not my brow 
“be slit; and let not my mouth be shut fast by reason — 
“of the incantations which thou hast within thee, 
“according to that which thou doest for the Khus 
“through (6) the incantations which they have within 
“themselves. Get thee back and depart at the [sound 
“of] the two speeches which the goddess Isis uttered, 
“when thou didst come to cast the recollection of evil 
“things into the mouth of Osiris (7) by the will of Suti 
“his enemy, saying, ‘ Let thy face be towards thy privy 
“parts, and look upon that face which cometh forth 


- 


Chap.xc.9] RECOLLECTION FROM THE MOUTH 283 


“from the flame of the Eye of Horus against thee from 
“within the Eye of Tem,’ and the calamity (8) of that 
“night which shall consume thee. And Osiris went 
“back, for the abomination of thee was in him; and 
“thou didst go back, for the abomination of him is in 
“thee. I have gone back, for the abomination of 
“thee is in me; and thou shalt go back, for the abomi- 
“nation of me is in thee. (9) Thou wouldst come unto 
“me, but I say that thou shalt not advance to me so 
“that I come to an end, and [I] say then to the divine 
“slaughterers of the god Shu, ‘ Depart.” | 


CHAPTER XCI. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 6).] 


Vignette: The soul of the deceased, in the form of a human- 
headed bird, standing in front of a door (see Papyrus of Ani, 
sheet 17). 


284 THE DELIVERY OF THE SOUL [Chap. xci, 


Text: (1) Tur CHAPTER OF NOT LETTING (2) THE 
SOUL OF NU, TRIUMPHANT, BE CAPTIVE IN THE UNDER- 
worLD. He saith :— 


“Hail, thou who art exalted! |Hail,| thou who art 
“adored! O thou mighty one of Souls, thou divine 
‘Soul, thou possessor of (3) terrible power, who dost 
“put the fear of thyself into the gods, thou who art 
“crowned upon thy throne of majesty, I pray thee to 
“make a way for the ba (soul), and for the khu, and 
“for the khaibit (shade) of the overseer of the house of 
“the overseer of the seal, Nu, triumphant (4) [and let 
“him be] provided therewith. I am a perfect khu, and 
“T have made [my] way unto the place wherein dwell 
“Ra and Hathor.” 


RUBRIC: If this chapter be known [by the deceased] he 
shall be able to transform himself into a khw provided [with 
his soul and with his shade] in the underworld, and he shall 
never be held captive at any door in Amentet, in entering in or 
in coming out.! 


1 This Rubric is taken from the Papyrus of Ani, sheet 17. 


Chap. xcii. tr] RELEASE OF SOUL AND SHADE 285 


CHAPTER XCII. 


[From the Papyrus of Nebseni (Brit. Mus. No. 9900, sheet 6). ] 


From the Papyrus of Ani, 


Vignette: The soul of the deceased, in the form of a human- 
headed bird, flying out.from the doorway of the tomb. Variant 
vignettes represent the deceased as having opened the door of 
the tomb and having his soul by his side, or as standing before 
the open door with hands stretched out to embrace his soul. 
An interesting vignette represents the disk of the sun with 
rays shooting forth from it above the tomb, and the soul of the 
deceased hovering over his shade, drawn in solid black colour, 
which has just emerged therefrom (see Naville, op. cit., Bd. I. 
Bl. 104). 


Text: (1) THE CHAPTER OF OPENING THE TOMB 
TO THE soUL [AND] TO THE SHADE OF OsrRis the 
scribe Nebseni, the lord of reverence, born of the 
lady of the house Mut-restha, triumphant, so THAT 


286 THE RELEASE OF THE SOUL AND [Chap. xcii. 2 


HE MAY COME FORTH BY DAY AND (2) HAVE DOMINION 
OVER HIS FEET. [He saith :—] 

“That which was shut fast hath been opened, that is 
“to say, he that lay down in death [hath been unloosed]. 
“That which was open hath been shut to my soul 
“through the command of the Eye of Horus, (3) which 
“hath strengthened me and which maketh to stand 
‘fast the beauties which are upon the forehead of Ra, 
“whose strides are long as [he] lifteth up [his] legs [in 
journeying]. I have made for myself a way, my 
“members are mighty (4) and are strong. I am 
“Horus the avenger of his 
“divine father. I am he who 
‘“bringeth along his divine 
“father, and who bringeth 
“along his mother by means 
“of his sceptre (?). And the 
“way shall be opened unto him 
“who hath (5) gotten dominion 
“over his feet, and he shall 
“see the Great God in the Boat of Ra, [when] souls are 
“counted therein at the bows, (6) and when the years also 
“are counted up. Grant that the Hye of Horus, which 
“maketh the adornments of light to be firm upon the 
(7) forehead of Ra, may deliver my soul for me, and 
“let there be darkness upon your faces, O ye who 
“would hold fast Osiris. O keep not captive my soul, 
“OQ keep not ward (8) over my shade, but let a way be 
‘opened for my soul [and] for my shade, and let [them] 


From the Papyrus of Khare. 


Chap. xcii. 13] OF THE SHADE FROM THE TOMB 287 


“see the great God in the shrine (9) on the day of the 
“judgment of souls, and let [them] recite the utter- 
“ances of Osiris, whose habitations are hidden, to 
“those who guard the members of Osiris, and (10) 
“who keep ward over the Spirits, and who hold cap- 
“tive the shades of the dead who would work (11) 
“evil against me, so 
“that they shall 
“(not] work evil 
“aoainst me. May 
“a way for thy 
“double (4a), along 
“with thee and 
“along with [thy] 
“soul, be prepared 
ef by those who keep From the Papyrus of Nefer-uben-f, 
“ward over the 

“members of Osiris, and who hold captive (12) the 
“shades of the dead. Heaven shall [not] keep thee, 


“the earth shall [not| hold thee captive, thou shalt not 
“have thy being with the divine beings who make 
“slaughter, (13) but thou shalt have dominion over 
“thy legs, and thou shalt advance to thy body straight- 
‘way in the earth [and to] those who belong to the 
‘shrine and guard the members of Osiris.” 


288 OF AVOIDING THE EAST [Chap, xciii. 1 


CHAPTER XCIIL 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 6). ] 


Vignette: A Buckle with human hands and arms which 

grasp the deceased by his left arm (see Naville, op. ett., Bd. I. 

Bl. 105). In the Ani Papyrus (plate 17) and in the Saite 

Recension the vignette shows the deceased standing, with both 

hands raised in adoration, before a god who is seated in a boat 

and who has his head turned so that his face looks backwards 
(see Lepsius, op. cit., Bl. 34). 


Text: (1) Tor CHAPTER OF NOT SAILING TO THE 
HAST IN THE UNDERWORLD. The overseer of the 
house of the overseer of the seal, Nu, triumphant, 
saith :— (2) 


“Hail, phallus ef Ra, who departest from thy 
“calamity [which ariseth] through opposition (?), the 
“eycles have been without movement for millions of 
“years. I am stronger (3) than the strong, I am 
“mightier than the mighty. If I sail away or if I 
‘be snatched away to the east through the two horns, 


Chap. xciii.7] OF THE INK-POT AND PALETTE 289 


(4) or (as others say), “if any evil and abominable thing 
“be done unto me at the feast of the devils, the phallus 
“of Ra shall be swallowed up, (5) [along with] the head 
“of Osiris. And behold me, for I journey along over 
“the fields wherein the gods mow down those who 
“make reply unto [their words]; now verily (6) the 
“two horns of the god Khepera shall be thrust aside ; 
“and verily pus shall spring into being in the eye of 
“Tem along with corruption if I be kept in restraint, 
“or if I have gone (7) towards the east, or if the feast 
“of devils be made in my presence, or if any malignant 
“wound be inflicted upon me.” ! 


CHAPTER XCIV. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No, 10,477, sheet 12). ] 


Vignette: The deceased seated with a table before him, on 

which rest an ink-pot and the palette of a scribe: in the Saite 

Recension (see Lepsius, op. cit., Bl. 34) the deceased is offering 
an ink-pot and a palette to the god Thoth. 


1 The Papyrus of Ani (see plates 16 and 17) contains what are, 
apparently, two versions of this Chapter. 


VOL, II, EK 


290 OF THE INK-POT AND PALETTE (Chap. xciv. 


Text: (1) Tue CHaprer or (2) PRAYING FOR AN 
INK-POT AND FOR A PALETTE. ‘he overseer of the 
house of the overseer of the seal, Nu, triumphant, 
saith :— 

“ Hail, aged god, who dost behold thy divine father 
“and who art the guardian of the book (3) of Thoth, 
“lbehold I have come; I am endowed with glory, I am | 
‘endowed with strength, I am filled with might, and I 
“am supplied with the books of Thoth], and I have 
“brought [them to enable me] to pass through the god 
“ Aker who dwelleth in Set. I have brought the ink- 
“pot and the palette as being the objects which are in 
“the hands (4) of Thoth; hidden is that which is in 
“them. Behold me in the character of a seribe! I 
‘have brought the offal of Osiris, and I have written 
“thereon (5). I have made (7.e., copied) the words of 
“the great and beautiful god each day fairly: O Heru- 
“khuti, thou didst order me and I have made (i.e., 
“ copied) what is right and true, and I do bring it unto 
“thee each day.” 


Chap. xcv. 3] OF BEING NIGH UNTO THOTH 291 


CHAPTER XCV. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 7). ] 


Vignette: The deceased standing before Thoth in adoration 

of the god. In the Papyrus of User-hat (Brit. Mus. No. 10,009), 

which probably belongs to the period of the XVIIIth dynasty, 

the vignette is a goose, but this arises from the fact that the 

Chapter is there called “{The Chapter] of making the trans- 
formation into a goose.” 

Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF BEING NIGH UNTO 
THoru. ‘The overseer of the house of the overseer 
of the seal, Nu, triumphant, saith :— (2) 

“T am he who sendeth forth terror into the powers 
“of rain and thunder, and I ward off from the great 
“divine lady the attacks of violence. [I have smitten 
“like the god Shat (7.e., the god of slaughter), and I 
“have poured out libations of cool water like the god 
“Ashu, and I have worked for the great divine lady 
“Ito ward off| the attacks of violence], I have made 
“to flourish [my] knife along with the knife (8) which 
“is in the hand of Thoth in the powers of rain and 
“ thunder.” 


292 OF BEING NIGH UNTO THOTH [Chap. xevi. 1 


CHAPTERS XCVI. anp XCVII. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheets 19 and 20.)] 


Vignette : The deceased standing behind the god Thoth. 


The vignette in which the deceased is seen kneeling 
in adoration before “ Ra, the great god, the lord of the 
Semketet boat,” really belongs to the second portion of 
the chapter. 


Text: (1) THE CHAPTER OF BEING NIGH UNTO 

_ THOTH AND OF GIVING GLORY UNTO A MAN IN THE 

UNDERWORLD. ‘The overseer of the house of the over- 
seer of the seal, Nu, triumphant, saith :— 

“Tam the god Her-ib-maat-f and I have come to 

“oive (2) right and truth to Ra; I have made Suti to 

“be at peace with me by means of offerings made to 


‘ I.e., “he who dwelleth in his Hye.” — 


Chap. xevii. 5] AND OF GIVING GLORY 293 


“the god Aker and to the Tesheru deities,! and by 
[making] reverence unto Seb.” ” 


Hane 13 
=ZI() 


Vignette : The Sun-god Ra seated in his boat. Before him 

stands Seb offering to the god the feather of Maat; behind 

Seb is the sceptre of Anubis. The deceased kneels at the 
front of the boat. 


|The following| words are to be recited in the Sektet 
boat :—‘“‘| Hail,] (5) seeptre of Anubis, I have made the 
“four Khus* who are in the train of the lord of the 
‘universe to be at peace with me, and I am the lord of 
“the fields through their decree. (4) I am the divine 
“father Bah (ie., the god of the water-flood), and I 
“do away with the thirst of him that keepeth ward 
“over the Lakes. Behold ye me, then, O great (5) 
“oods of majesty who dwell among the Souls of Annu, 


1 T.e., the red flames which appear in the sky at sunrise and 


sunset. 

2 The XCVIth Chapter ends here according to the Saite 
Recension (see Lepsius, op. cit., Bl. 34). 

3 The names of the four are Maa-atep-f, Kheri-beq-f, Heru- 
khenti-[an]-maati, and Anpu. 


294 OF GIVING GLORY [Chap, xcvii, 6 


“for I am Jifted up over you. I am the god Menkh 
“(i.e., Gracious one), who dwelleth among you. (6) 
“Verily I have cleansed my soul, O great god of 
“majesty, set not before me the evil obstacles which 
“issue from thy mouth, (7) and let not destruction 
“come round about me, or upon me. I have made 
“myself clean in the Lake of Making to be at Peace, 
“land in the Lake of] Weighing in the Balance, and I 
“have bathed myself in Netert-utchat, which is under 
“the holy Sycamore tree (8) of heaven. Behold [I 
‘““am| bathed, [and I have] triumphed [over] all [mine 
“enemies| straightway who come forth and rise up 
“against right and truth. Iam right and true in the 
“earth. (9) I, even I, have spoken (?) with my mouth 
“which is] the power of the Lord, the Only one, Ra 
“the mighty, who liveth upon right and truth. Let 
“not injury be inflicted upon me, [but let me be| 
“clothed on the day of those who go forward (f) (10) 
“to every [good] thing.” 


Chap. xcviii. 4] OF BRINGING A BOAT 295 


CHAPTER XCVIII. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 9). ] 


Vignette: In the Theban Papyri this Chapter has no 

vignette; in the Saite Recension (see Lepsius, op. cit., Bl. 35) 

the vignette represents the deceased standing with his right 

hand outstretched in the act of addressing a god who is seated 
in a boat. 


Text: (1) Tom CHAPTER OF BRINGING ALONG A 
BOAT IN HEAVEN. ‘The overseer of the house of the 
overseer of the seal, Nu, triumphant, saith :— (2) 


“ Fail to thee, O thou Thigh which dwellest in the 
‘northern heaven in the Great Lake, which art seen 
“and which diest not. I have stood up over thee when 
“thou didst rise like a god. I have seen thee, (3) and 
“T have not lain down in death; I have stood over 
“thee, and I have risen like a god. I have cackled 
“like a goose, and I have alighted like the hawk (4) 
“by the divine clouds and by the great dew. I have 
‘journeyed from the earth to heaven, The god Shu 


296 THE LADDER OF HEAVEN (Chap, xeviii. 5 


“hath [made] me to stand up, the god of Light (5) 
“hath made me to be vigorous by the two sides of the 
“ Tadder,! and the stars which never 
“rest set [me] on [my] way and bring 
‘“|me] away from slaughter. I bring 
“along with me the things which drive 
“back (6) calamities as I advance over 
“the passage of the god Pen; thou 
“comest, how great art thou, O god 
“Pen! Ihave come from the Pool of (7) 
“Flame which is in the Sekhet-Sasa 
“(i.e., the Field of Fire). Thou livest 
“in the Pool of Flame in Sekhet-Sasa, 
‘“‘and (8) I live upon the staff of the 
“holy [god]. Hail, thou god Kaa, who 
“dost bring those things which are 
“in the boats on the Lake of Hair. 
‘May there be offerings of coolness [to 
‘me as] (9) I stand up in the boat and 
‘“onide myself [over] the water; I have 
‘stood up in the boat and the god hath 
‘“‘onided me. I have stood up. I have 
“spoken. [I am master of the] (10) 
“crops. I sail round about as I go 


“forward, and the gates which are in 
“Sekhem (Letopolis) are opened unto me, and fields 


1A vignette of the Ladder is given in the Papyrus of Ani 
(2nd edit., plate 22) between Chapter CXXXIV. and the second 
copy of Chapter XVIII. ; it is reproduced here. 


Chap. xcix. 2] OF BRINGING A BOAT 297 


“are awarded unto me in the city of Unnu (Her- 
‘““mopolis), (11) and labourers (?) are- given unto me, 
“together with those of my own flesh and bone.” 


CHAPTER XCIX. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheets 21 and 22). | 


ee 


me 


A i 
a, AAT Hy TEI BuSHEneRas 


Vignette: The deceased in a boat, with or without a sail 
hoisted, 

Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF BRINGING ALONG A 

BOAT IN THE UNDERWORLD. (2) The overseer of the 

house of the overseer of the seal, Nu, triumphant, 


BA 
ne 


= 


saith :— 
“Hail, ye who bring along the boat over the evil 
“back [of Apepi|, grant that IT may bring the boat 


208 OF BRINGING A BOAT [Chap. xcix. 3 


“along, and coil up (3) [its] ropes in peace, in peace. 
“Come, come, hasten, hasten, for I have come to see 
“my father Osiris, the lord of the dnsi garment, who 
“hath gained the mastery (4) with joy of heart. Hail, 
“lord of the rain-storm, thou Male, thou Sailor! Hail, 
“thou who dost sail over the evil back of Apep! Hail, 
“thou that dost bind up heads and doth stablish the 
“bones of the neck (5) when thou comest forth from 
“the knives. Hail, thou who art in charge of the 
“hidden boat, who dost fetter Apep, grant that I may 
“bring along the boat, and that I may coil up (6) the 
“yopes and that I may sail forth therein. This land 
“Gs baleful, and the stars have over-balanced them- 
“selves and have fallen upon their faces therein, and 
“they have not found anything which will help them 
“to ascend again: their path is blocked by (7) the 
“tonove of Ra. Antebu [is] the guide of the two 
“lands. Seb is stablished [through] their rudders. 
(8) The power which openeth the Disk. The prince 
“of the red beings. I am brought along like (9) him 
“that hath suffered shipwreck; grant that my Ahu, 
‘“my brother, may come to me, and that [I] may set 
“out for the place whereof thou (10) knowest.” 


SSG aaa 


Chap. xcix. 22] OF BRINGING A BOAT 299 


“Tell me my name,” saith the Wood whereat [I would 
anchor; “ Lord of the two lands who-dwellest in the 
“Shrine,” is thy name. 

“Tell me my name,” (11) saith the Rudder; “Leg of 
‘“Hapiu” is thy name. 

“Tell me my name,” saith the (12) Rope; “ Hair 
“with which Anpu (Anubis) finisheth the work of my 
‘“embalmment ” (13) is thy name. 

“Tell us our name,” say the Oar-rests; “ Pillars of 
“the underworld ” is your name. 

“Tell me (14) my name,” saith the Hold; “Aker” 
is thy name. 

“Tell me my name,” saith the Mast ; (15) “He who 
“Dringeth back the great lady after she hath gone 
“away 


, 


is thy name. 
“Tell me my name,” saith the (16) Lower Deck ; 
“Standard of Ap-uat” is thy name.” 

“Tell me my name,” saith the Upper Post; (17) 
“Throat of Mestha” is thy name. 

“Tell me my name,” saith the Sail; (18) “Nut” is 
thy name. 

“Tell us our name,” say the Pieces of Leather; “Ye 
“who are made from the hide (19) of the Mnevis Bull, 
“which was burned by Suti,” is your name. 

“Tell us our name,” (20) say the Paddles; “ Fingers 
“of Horus the first-born ” is your name.” 

“Tell me (21) my name,” saith the Matchabet ; “The 
“hand of Isis, which wipeth away the blood from the 
“ (22) Eye of Horus,” is thy name, 


300 OF BRINGING A BOAT [Chap., xcix, 23 


“Tell us our names,” say the Planks which are in its 
(23) hulk; “ Mesthi, [lapi, Tuamautef, Qebh-sennuf, (24) 
“Haqau (7.e., he who leadeth away captive), Thet-em- 
“Aua (z.e., he who seizeth by violence), Maa-an-tef (i.e., 
“he who seeth what the father bringeth), and Ari-nef- 
“tchesef (7.e., he who made himself),” are your names. 

“Tell us our names,” say the Bows; ‘He who is at 
“the head of his nomes ” (25) is your name. 

“Tell me my name,” saith the Hull; “Mert” is thy 
name. 

“Tell me my name,” saith the Rudder; “ Aqa” (ie., 
true one) is thy name, O thou who shinest from the 
water, (26) hidden beam (?) is thy name, 

“Tell me my name,” saith the Keel; “Thigh (or 
Leg) of Isis, which Ra cut off with the knife (27) to 
“bring blood into the Sekfet boat,” is thy name. 

“Tell me my name,” saith the Sailor; “Traveller ” 
is thy name. 

(28) Tell me my name,” saith the Wind by which 
thou art borne along; “The North Wind which 
“cometh from Tem to the nostrils of Khenti- 
‘“Amenti”! (29) is thy name. 

“Tell me my name,” saith the River, “if thou 
“wouldst travel upon me”; “Those which can be 
“seen” is thy name. 

“Tell us our name,” say the River Banks; “ Des- 
“troyer of the god (30) Au-a (i.e., he of the spacious 
hand) in the water-house” is thy name. 


1 T.e., the ‘‘ Governor of Amenti,” or Osiris. 


Chap. xcix. 37] OF BRINGING A BOAT 301 


“Tell me my name,” saith the Ground, “if thou 
“wouldst walk upon me”; “The Nose of heaven 
“which proceedeth from the god Utu, (31) who 
“‘dwelleth in the Sekhet-Aarru, and who cometh forth 
“with rejoicing therefrom,” is thy name. 

THEN SHALL BE RECITED BEFORE THEM THESE 
WORDS :— 

“Hail to you, O ye divine beings with beautiful Kas, 
“ye divine lords (32) of things, who exist and who live 
“for ever, and [whose] double period of an illimitable 
“number of years is eternity, I have made a way unto 
“you, grant ye my food and sepulchral meals for my 
“mouth, [and grant that] I may speak (33) therewith, 
“and that the goddess Isis [may give me] loaves and 
“cakes in the presence of the great god. I know the 
“oreat god before whose nostrils ye place (34) celestial 
“food, and his name is Thekem; both when he maketh 
“his way from the eastern horizon of heaven and when 
“he journeyeth into the western horizon of heaven may 
“his journey be (35)\my journey, and his going forth 
“my going forth. Let me not be destroyed at the 
‘« Mesget chamber, and let not the devils gain dominion 
“over my members. I have my cakes (36) in the city 
“of Pe, and I have my ale in the city of Tepu, and let 
“the offerings [which are given unto you] be given 
“unto me this day. Let my offerings be wheat and 
“barley; let my offerings (87) be anti unguent and 
“‘Jinen garments ; let my offerings be for life, strength, 
“and health: let my offerings be a coming forth by 


302 OF BRINGING A BOAT (Chap. xcix. 38 
“day in any form whatsoever (38) in which it may 
“please me to appear in Sekhet-Aarru.” 


RUBRIC: If this chapter be known [by the deceased] he 
shall come forth into Sekhet-Aarru, (39) and bread, and wine, 
and cakes shall be given unto him at the altar of the great god, 
and fields, and an estate [sown] with wheat and barley, which 
the followers of Horus shall (40) reap for him. And he shall 
eat of that wheat and barley, and his limbs shall be nourished 
therewith, and his body shall be like unto the bodies of the 
gods, and he shall come forth into (41) Sekhet-Aarru in any 
form whatsoever he pleaseth, and he shall appear therein 
regularly and continually. 


CHAPTERS C. anp CXXIX. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheets 27 and 28). | 


Oe 
THO TTT 


Vignette : A boat, wherein stand the deities Isis, Thoth, 
Khepera, and Shu, and the deceased sailing on a stream. The 
vignette in the Saite Recension (see Lepsius, op. ett., Bl. 37) 
shows the deceased poling along a boat wherein are Ra and the 
Bennu bird, and in front of the boat stand the emblem of the 


Chap.c.8] OF MAKING THE SPIRIT PERFECT 303 


Kast, the god Osiris, and the ef, i.¢., the emblem of Osiris and 
of stability. The four short lines of text written over the boat 
read:—The overseer of the house of the overseer of the seal, 
Nu, triumphant, raiseth up the ef, and stablisheth the Buckle, 
and he saileth with Ra into any place that he pleaseth. 


Text: (1) Tue Book or MAKING PERFECT THE KHU 
AND OF CAUSING HIM TO GO FORTH INTO THE BOAT OF 
RA ALONG WITH THOSE WHO ARE IN HIS FOLLOWING (?). 
(2) The overseer of the house of the overseer of the seal, 
Nu, triumphant, saith ;— 

“T have brought the divine Bennw to the east, and 
“Osiris to the city of Tattu. (3) I have opened the 
“treasure houses of the god Hap, I have made clean 
“the roads of the Disk, and I have drawn the god 
“ Sekeri! along (4) upon his sledge. The mighty and 
“divine Lady hath made me strong at her hour. I 
“have praised and glorified the Disk, (5) and I have 
“united myself unto the divine apes who sing at the 
“dawn, and I am a divine Being among them. I have 
“made myself a counterpart of the goddess Isis, (6) and 
“her power (Khu) hath made me strong. I have tied 
“up the rope, I have driven back Apep, I have made 
“him to walk backwards. (7) Ra hath stretched out to 
“me both his hands, and his mariners have not repulsed 
“me; my strength is the strength of the Kye of Ra, 
“and the strength of the Kye of Ra is my strength. 
(8) If the overseer of the house of the overseer of the 
“seal, Nu, triumphant, be separated [from the boat of 


1 T.e., the god of the Ilennu boat. 


304 OF MAKING THE SPIRIT PERFECT [ Chap. c. 9 


“ Ra], then shall he (i.e, Ra) be separated (9) from the 
“Hee and from the Abfu fish.” 


RUBRIC: [This chapter] shall be recited over the design 
which hath been drawn above, and it shall be written upon 
papyrus (10) which hath not been written upon, with [ink made 
of} grains of green abut mixed with anti water, and the papyrus 
shall be placed on the breast (11) of the deceased; it shall not 
enter in to (/.¢., touch) his members. If this be done for any 
deceased person he shall go forth (12) into the boat of Ra in 
the course of the day every day, and the god Thoth shall take 
account of him as he cometh forth from (13) and goeth in the 
course of the day every day, regularly and continually, [into 
the boat of Ra] as a perfect khw, and he shall set up the Jef 
and shall stablish the buckle, and shall sail about with Ra into 
any place he wisheth. 


In the Saite Recension Chapter C. is repeated as 
CXXIX, and both texts have the same vignette. The 
rubric of Chapter CXXIX. is, however, fuller than that 
of Chapter C., and it may conveniently be divided into 
two parts, the first of which refers to the picture which 
is ordered to be written upon a piece of new papyrus, 
and the second to the Chapter itself; the originals of 
both are to be found in the variant texts of the rubric 
of the Chapter published by Naville (op. cit. Bd. IL. 
p. 236). 


Chap. ci. 4] OF PROTECTING THE BOAT OF RA 395 


CHAPTER CI. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit, Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 27). ] 


Vignette: In the Papyrus of Nu this Chapter has no 

vignette. In the Saite Recension the deceased is seen poling 

along a boat wherein are the god Ra and the Bennu bird 
(see Lepsius, op. ezt., Bl. 37). 


Text: [THE CHAPTER OF PROTECTING THE Boat 
or Ra.|! 

“(1) O thou that cleavest the water (2) as thou 
“comest forth from the stream and dost sit upon thy 
“place in thy boat, sit thou upon thy place in thy boat 
“as thou goest forth to thy station of yesterday, and 
“do thou join the Osiris, the (3) overseer of the house 
“of the overseer of the seal, Nu, triumphant, the perfect 
“Khu, unto thy mariners, and let thy strength be his 
“strenoth. Hail, Ra, in thy name of Ra, (4) if thou 
“dost pass by the eye of seven cubits, which hath a 


! This title is taken from the Saite Recension. 
VOL. II, G 


306 OF PROTECTING THE BOAT OF RA  [Chap.ci. 5 


“pupil of three cubits, then verily do thou strengthen 
“the Osiris Nu, triumphant, the perfect Khu, [and let 
“him be among] thy mariners, and let thy (5) strength 
“be his strength. Hail, Ra, in thy name of Ra, if 
“thou dost pass by those who are overturned in death 
“then verily do thou make the Osiris (6) Nu, trium- 
“phant, the perfect soul, to stand up upon his feet, and 
“may thy strength be his strength. Hail, Ra,in thy 
“name of Ra, (7) if the hidden things of the under- 
“world are opened unto thee and thou dost gratify (?) 
“the heart of the cycle of thy gods, then verily do thou 
“orant joy of heart unto the overseer of the house of 
“the overseer of the seal, Nu, triumphant, and let thy 
“strength be his (8) strength. Thy members, O Ra, 
‘are established by (this) Chapter (?).” 

RUBRIC: [This chapter] shall be recited over a bandlet of 
the fine linen of kings [upon which] it hath been written with 
anti, which shall be laid upon the neck of the perfect khu (9) 
on the day of the burial. If this amulet be laid upon his neck 
he shall do everything which he desireth to do even like the 
gods; and he shall join himself unto the followers (10) of 
Horus; and he shall be stablished as a star face to face with 
Septet (Sothis); and his corruptible body shall be as a god 
along with his kinsfolk for ever; and the goddess (11) Menget 
shall make plants to germinate upon his body; and the majesty 
of the god Thoth lovingly shall make the light to rest upon his 


corruptible body at will, even as he did for the majesty of the 
King of the North and of the South, the god Osiris, triumphant. 


Chap. cii. 4] OF ENTERING THE BOAT OF RA 307 


CHAPTER CII. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 28). ] 


Vignette : The boat of Ra with the god seated therein and 

holding a paddle; before him kneels the goddess Isis (?), and 

behind him the deceased. Sometimes Ra is accompanied by 

the gods Thoth and Khepera and sometimes by Anubis alone 

(see Naville, op. cit., Bd. I. Bl. 114). In the Saite Recension 

the deceased is kneeling before Ra at a table of offerings 
(see Lepsius, op. c7t., Bl. 38). 


Text: (1) THE CHAPTER OF GOING INTO THE Boat 
(2) or RA. The overseer of the house of the overseer 
of the seal, Nu, triumphant, saith :— 


“Hail, thou Great God who art in thy boat, bring 
“thou me into thy boat. [I have come forward to thy 
“‘steps|, let me be the director (8) of thy journeyings 
“and let me be among those who belong to thee and 
“who are among the stars which never rest. The 
“things which are an abomination unto thee and the 
“things which are an abomination unto me I will not 
“eat, that which is an abomination unto me, (4) that 
“which is an abomination unto me is filth and I will 


308 OF ENTERING THE BOAT OF RA _ [Chap.cii. 5 


“not eat thereof; but sepulchral offerings and holy 
“food [will I eat], and I shall not be overthrown 
“thereby. I will not draw nigh unto filth with my 
“hands, and I will not walk (5) thereon with my 
“sandals, because my bread [is made] of white barley, 
“and my ale [is made] of red barley; and behold, the 
“ Sektet boat and the Afet boat have brought these 
“things (6) and have laid the gifts(?) of the lands 
“upon the altar of the Souls of Annu. Hymns of 
“praise be to thee, O Ur-arit-s, as thou travellest 
“through heaven! Let there be food [for thee], O 
“dweller in the city of Teni,! (7) and when the dogs 
“oather together let me not suffer harm. I myself 
“have come, and I have delivered the god from the 
“things which have been inflicted upon him, and from 
“the grievous sickness of the body, (8) of the arm, and 
“of the leg. I have come and I have spit upon the 
“body, I have bound up the arm, and I have made the 
“leg to walk. (9) [I have] entered [the boat] and [I] 
“sail round about by the command of Ra.” 


! A city near the modern Abydos. 


Po 


Chap, ciii.] OF BEING WITH HATHOR 399 


CHAPTER CIIL 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit, Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 8).] 


Vignette: The goddess Hathor, having a disk and horns 
upon her head, and a sceptre in her left hand; behind her 
stands the deceased. 


Text: (1) Tue CHAPTER OF BEING WITH THE GOD- 
pess Hatuor. The overseer of the house of the over- 
seer of the seal, Nu, triumphant, saith :— 


“T am the pure traveller. Behold, (2) O Ahi, 
“behold, O Ahi, let me be among those who follow 
“the goddess Hathor.” 


310 OF SITTING WITH THE GODS (Chap. civ. 


CHAPTER CIV. 


[From the Papyrus of Nebseni (Brit. Mus. No, 9900, sheet 8). ] 


Vignette: Two “great gods” seated on thrones facing each 

other: on the ground between them sits the deceased. In the 

Saite Recension the deceased is seated on a low pedestal before 
three gods (see Lepsius, op, cit., Bl. 38). 


Text: (1) Tue CHAPTER OF SITTING AMONG THE 
GREN TGODSaiese cat ee Behold Nebseni, (4) who 
saith :— 

“T sit among the great gods, and I have made a way 
“for myself (5) through the house of the Seheptet boat; 
“and behold, the mantis! hath brought me to see the 
“oreat gods (6) who dwell in the underworld, and I 
“shall be triumphant before them, for I am pure.” 


1 Bebait or Abait, i.e., the ‘ praying mantis,” or Mantis religiosa ; 
see the note to Chapter LXXVI. _ 


Chap. cv. 3] OF OFFERING TO THE KA 311 


CHAPTER CV. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 7).] 


J 


O23) $40 


ida ay ai 


Vignette: The deceased standing before a ka on a pedestal 
( LJ \; with his right hand he pours out a libation, and with 


his left he makes an offering of incense. In the Papyrus of 

Nebseni we have the deceased and his wife seated at a table of 

offerings, and their son pours out a lbation and burns incense 
before them. 


Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF MAKING OFFERINGS TO 
THE KA IN THE UNDERWORLD. The overseer of the 
house of the overseer of the seal, Nu, triumphant, 
saith :— (2) 

“Homage to thee, O my sa, who art my period of 
“life! Grant thou that I may come before thee, and 
“Jet me rise up [like the Sun], and let me be strong, 
“and let me have my soul, (8) and let me gain the 
“mastery [over mine enemies]. For I have brought to 
“thee an offering of incense, and I have made myself 


1! Or, ‘*contemporary.” 


312 OF OFFERING TO THE KA [Chap. cv. 4 


“pure therewith, and I will purify that which issueth 
“from thee therewith. (4) The evil things which I 
“have spoken, aud the hateful transgressions which I 
“have committed lay thou not upon me, for I [have] 
“the mother-of-emerald amulet, which (5) belongeth 
“unto the neck of Ra, and which hath been placed 
“|there| by those who dwell in the double horizon (i.e., 
“the eastern and western parts of the sky). Their 
“vigour is my vigour, their vigour is my vigour; my 
“ka is like unto their kas, and the celestial food of my 
‘ka is like unto the celestial food of their kas. (6) O 
“thou who liftest up the Scales and who exaltest right 
“and truth to the nostrils of Ra this day, let not my 
“head fall away from me. (7) For, behold, am I not 
‘the eye which looketh upon thee? And am I not the 
“ear which hearkeneth unto [thee]? For, behold, am 
“T not the bull of those who have fallen down in 
“death? And have not sepulchral meals [been made | 
“for me? (8) And are not those who live in the 
“heights,” or according to another reading, “ those 
“who are chiefs of Nut, for me? [Grant thou that] 
“T may go forward by thee, for I, even I, am pure, 
“and [I have] made Osiris to triumph over his 
“enemies,” 


Chap. cvi. ] PRAYER FOR OFFERINGS Sr 


CHAPTER CVI. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 8).] 


Vignette: A table of offerings. In the Saite Recension the 
deceased is making offerings to the god Ptah (see Lepsius, 
op. cit., Bl. 38). 


Text: (1) THe CHaprer OF GIVING SEPULCHRAI 
MEALS UNTO THE OsiRIS NU, TRIUMPHANT, IN HET- 
Prau-KA (i.e., MEMPHIS) IN THE UNDERWORLD. The 
overseer of the house of the overseer of the seal, Nu, 
triumphant, saith :— (2) 

“ Hail, Great God, thou lord of heavenly food! Hail, 
“Great God, thou prince of the celestial habitations 
“which supply bread for the god Ptah! [Hail, Mighty 
“One who dwellest in the Great House!| Grant ye 
“unto me bread, grant ye (3) unto me ale, and let me 
“cleanse myself by means of the haunch and by the 
“ offerings of cakes. Hail, thou divine boat of Selhet- 
“ Aarru, let these cakes be brought to me (4) by thy 
‘stream, even as thy divine father, the mighty one, 
“passed thereon in the divine bark.” 


314 CHAPTER OF KNOWING [Chap, cvii. 


CHAPTER CVII. 


There is no equivalent for this Chapter in the papyri 
containing the Theban Recension. In the Saite Recen- 
sion (see Lepsius, op. cit., Bl. 39) this Chapter is called 
the ‘CHAPTER OF GOING INTO AND OF COMING OUT 
FROM THE GATE OF THE GODS OF THE WEST, OF BEING 
AMONG THE FOLLOWERS OF RA, AND OF KNOWING THE 
SouLs oF THE West,” and 
the vignette represents the 
deceased standing, with both 
hands raised in adoration, be- 
fore Ra, Sebek, Hathor, and a 
serpent, who rest on the slope 
of a mountain. The text is 
actually the first line and a half of Chapter CIX. 
which is entitled the “CHAPTER OF KNOWING THE 
SouLs oF THE Hast.” 


CHAPTER CVIII. 
{From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 8). } 


Vignette : The deities Temu, Sebek, lord of Bakhau, and 
Hathor, lady of Masheru, seated. 


Chap. cviii. 8] THE SOULS OF THE WEST 315 


Text: (1) Tue CHAPTER OF KNOWING (2) THE SOULS 
or THE West. The overseer of the house of the over- 
seer of the seal, Nu, triumphant, saith :—- 


“Now the Mountain of Bakhau,! whereupon this 
‘heaven supports itself, (3) is situated in the eastern 
“part of heaven, and it hath dimensions of three hun- 
“dred het (i.e, 30,000 cubits)? in length, and one 
“hundred and fifty khet (t.e., 15,000 cubits) in breadth; 
“Sebek, the lord of Bakhau, (4) [dwelleth] to the east 
“of the Mountain, and his temple is on the earth there. 
“There is a serpent on the brow of that Mountain, and 
“he measureth thirty cubits in Jength; the first eight 
“cubits of his length are [covered] with (5) flints and 
“with shining metal plates. The Osiris Nu, triumphant, 
“knoweth the name of this serpent which [dwelleth] 
“on his hill, ‘Dweller in his fire’ (6) is his name. 
“Now after Ra hath stood still he inclineth his eyes 
“towards him and a stoppage of the boat [of Ra] taketh 
“place, and a mighty (7) sleep cometh upon him that is 
“in the boat, and he gulpeth down seven cubits of the 
“oreat waters. Thereby he maketh Suti to depart, 
“having the harpoon of iron (8) in him, and thereby 
“he is caused to throw up everything which he hath 
“eaten, and thereby is Set put into his place of re- 
“straint. And then [I] recite before him the enchant- 


' T.e., the mountain of the sunrise. 

2 The Papyrus of Nebseni reads :—‘‘It is a cubit of seven and a 
half spans (7.e., the width of 30 fingers) of the balance of the earth 
in its length, and 300 cubits in width, 200.” 


316 OF KNOWING THE SOULS OF _ [Chap. cviii. 9 


“ment, saying, (9) Get thee back to the sky, for that 
“which is in my hand is ready. I stand up in thy 
“place of restraint, the boat advanceth taking heed to 
“the way; (10) thy head is covered up while I sail on 
“and turn back [thy steps]. I am the Man who 
“‘covereth thy head and who poureth cold water upon 
“thy palm, I have strength and (11) I am strong, I 
‘am the divine one who is mighty in enchantments, 
“namely, the son of Nut, and my splendour hath, 
“therefore, been delivered unto me. Who, then, is 
“this venerable Khu (12) who advanceth walking upon 
‘his belly and upon his tail and upon the joints of his 
“back? Verily it is I myself who do walk over thee, 
“and thy strength is in my power. I am he who (13) 
“lifteth up strength, and I have come, and I have 
“become master of the serpents of Ra when he setteth 
“in my sight at eventide. (14) I go round about 
‘heaven, but thou art fettered with fetters, which 
‘thing was ordained for thee formerly when Ra set 
“in life in his horizon. I, even I, know (15) how to 
“ouide the matters whereby the serpent Apep is driven 
“back, and I know the divine Souls of the West, that 
“is to say, Tem, and Sebek, the lord of Bakhau, (16) 
“and Hathor, the lady of the evening.” 


Chap. cix.3] THE WEST AND OF THE EAST 317 


CHAPTER CIX. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 12). ] 


Vignette: The god Heru-khuti (Harmachis) seated; before 
him is a spotted calf, behind which stands the deceased with 
both hands raised in adoration of the god; above is the 
Morning Star. Elsewhere the deceased is seen standing, with 
both hands raised in adoration, before three seated ibis-headed 
deities (see Naville, op. cit., Bd. I. Bl. 120). In the Saite 
Recension (see Lepsius, op. c’t., Bl. 39) the vignette is quite 
different. The god Ra-Harmachis, hawk-headed and wearing 
a disk which is encircled by a serpent, is seated in a boat; 
above the disk is the emblem of air, and he holds on his knees 
the emblem of life, Before him in the boat is a calf, above 
which is a star, and behind him stands the deceased. The boat 
is about to sail between two sycamore trees, in front of which 
stands the deceased, with both hands raised in adoration, 


Text: (1) THE CHAPTER OF KNOWING THE SoULs 
or THE East. (2) The overseer of the house of the 
overseer of the seal, Nu, triumphant, saith :— 


“T, even I, know the eastern gate of heaven—now 
“its southern part is at the Lake of Kharu (3) and its 


318 OF KNOWING THE SOULS OF THE EAST (Ch. cix. 4 


“northern part is at the canal of the geese—whereout 
“Ra cometh with winds which make him to advance. 
“YT am he who is concerned with the tackle (?) (4) 
“{which is] in the divine bark, I am the sailor who 
“ceaseth not in the boat of Ra. I, even I, know the 
“two Sycamores (5) of turquoise between which Ra 
“showeth himself when he strideth forward over the 
‘‘supports of Shu! towards the gate (6) of the lord of 
“the Kast through which Ra cometh forth. I, even I, 
“know the Sekhet-Aarru of (7) Ra, the walls of which 
“are of iron, The height of the wheat therein is five 
“cubits, of the ears thereof two cubits, and of the 
“stalks thereof three cubits. (8) The barley therein 
“is {in height] seven cubits, the ears thereof are three 
“cubits, and the stalks thereof are four cubits. And 
“behold, the Khus, each one of whom therein is nine 
“cubits in height, (9) reap it near the divine Souls of 
“the East. I, even I, know the divine Souls of the 
“Hast, that is to say, Heru-khuti (Harmachis), and the 
“calf of the goddess Khera, and (10) the Morning Star * 
“ldaily. A divine city hath been built for me, I know 
“it, and I know the name thereof; ‘Sekhet-Aarru’ is 
“its name.” ® 


1 T.e., the four pillars at the South, North, West, and Kast 
of heaven upon which the heavens were believed to rest. 

2 In the Saite Recension this Chapter is about twice as long as it 
is in the Theban Recension. 

8 The words in brackets are from the Papyrus of Nebseni, 


Chap, cx. ] THE ELYSIAN FIELDS 319 


CHAPTER CX. 


[From the Papyrus of Nebseni (Brit. Mus. No. 9900, sheet 17). ] 


= laeiA 


ay 
Mtns 


gg Oa pip Open Ope prep fre ptr, 


A 
WA 
cA 
WS 
AN 
WN 
WAN 
A 
AN 
ON 
aS 
WN 
LYN 
A 
WAN 
IWAN 
WIS 
KS 
CA 
AY 
A 
Ws 
IAN 
IW 
A 
aA 
RA: 
WX 
Gh, 
KASD 
A 
AY 
AN 
An 
Ow 
WwAY 
A 
OH 
aS 


Let AEE 


ZS 


Sekhet-hetepet (Papyrus of Nebseni), 


Vignette: The Sekhet-hetepet or “ Fields of peace,” com- 
monly called the “ Elysian Fields,” surrounded and intersected 
by streams. The divisions contain the following :—(a) Nebseni, 
the seribe and artist of the Temple of Ptah, with his arms 
hanging by his sides, entering the Elysian Fields. (4) The 
scribe Nebseni making an offering of incense to the “great 


320 THE ELYSIAN FIELDS [Chap. cx. 


company of the gods.” (c) Nebseni seated in a boat paddling ; 
above the boat are three symbols for “city.” (d) The deceased 
addressing a bearded, mummied figure. (e) Three Pools or 
Lakes called Urti,! Hetep,? and Qetqet respectively. (7) Neb- 
seni reaping in Sekhet-hetepet. (vy) Nebseni grasping the 
Bennu bird which is perched upon a stand; in front are 
three kas and three khus. (h) Nebseni seated and smelling a 
flower, the text reads: ‘Thousands of all good and pure things 
things to the ka of Nebseni.” (7) A table of offerings. (j) Four 
Pools or Lakes called Neb-taui, Uakha, Kha (?),and Hetep. (x) 
Nebseni ploughing with oxen by the side of a stream which is 
one thousand [measures] in length, and the width of which 
cannot be said; in it there are neither fish nor worms. (I) 
Nebseni ploughing with oxen on an island “the length of which 
is the length of heaven.” (m) A division shaped like a bowl in 
which is inscribed: “The birth-place of the god of the city, 
Qenqen{et nebt].” (7) An island whereon are four gods and a 
flight of steps; the legend reads: “The great company of the 
gods who are in Sekhet-hetep.” (0) The boat Tchetetfet with 
eight oars, four at the bows and four at the stern, floating at 
the end of a canal; in it is a flight of steps. The place where 
it lies is called the “ Domain of Neth.” (p) Two Pools, the 
names of which are illegible. 

In the Papyrus of Nebseni are two scenes, one on each side 
of “Sekhet-hetepet,” or the Elysian Fields. In the first (A) 
Nebseni stands, with both hands raised, and adores the com- 
pany of the gods who dwell in Sekhet-hetep, saying: “ Homage 
“to you, O ye lords of food, I have come in peace to your Field 
“to receive heavenly food, Grant ye that I may come to the 
‘Great God daily, and grant that I may attain to the offerings, 
“that is to say, to the cakes, and ale, and oxen, and ducks, and 
“bread, which are offered unto his ka.” The three short lines 
of hieroglyphics (2) in front of Nebseni read :—“ Nebseni, the 
“lord of reverence, the scribe and artist in the temples of the 
“ South and of the North, ascribeth praise to the company of 


1 Var. Hemat, 2 Var. Hast, 


Chap. cx. ] THE ELYSIAN FIELDS 321 


“the gods and adoreth the great god.” In the second scene 
Nebseni is standing upright and a youth is pouring a libation 
over him; at the same time another youth is bringing to him 
an offering of raiment. The text above him (C) reads :—‘ May 
“the god Osiris and all the company of the gods who dwell in 
“Sekhet-hetep grant offerings of cakes, and ale, and oxen, and 
“ducks, and bread, and all good things, and linen garments, 
“and incense each day, and an offering on the altar each day, 
“and the receiving of cakes of various kinds, and milk, and 
“wine, and heavenly food, and the following of the god at his 
“coming forth during his festivals of Re-stau along with the 
“favoured ones of the great god, to the ka of the scribe Neb- 
“ seni,” etc. 


The vignette in the Papyrus of Ani (sheet 35) has some 
interesting variants, and may be thus described :— 

(1) Ani making an offering before a hare-headed god, a 
snake-headed god, anda bull-headed god; behind him stands 
Thoth, holding his reed and palette. Ani paddling a boat, Ani 
addressing a hawk, before which are a table of offerings, a 
beatified being, three Lakes, and the legend “ Being at peace in 
the Field |of Peace], and having air for the nostrils.” 

(2) Ani reaping corn, Ani driving the oxen which tread out 
the corn; Ani addressing (or adoring) a Benny bird perched on 
a stand; Ani seated holding the kherp sceptre; a heap of red 
and a heap of white corn; three kas and three khus, which 
are perhaps to be read, “the food of the khus”; and three 
Lakes, 

(3) Ani ploughing a field near a stream which contains 
neither fish nor serpents. 

(4) The birthplace of the god of the city; an island on which 
is a flight of steps; a region called the place of the khus who 
are seven cubits high, the wheat is three cubits high and it is 
the sadhu who have become perfect who reap it; the region 
Ashet, the god who dwelleth therein being Unnefer, a boat 
with eight oars, lying at the end of a canal; and a boat 
floating on a canal. The name of the first boat “Behutu- 
tcheser,” and the name of the second, “ Tchefau.” 


VOL. II. H 


(Chap. cx. 


THE ELYSIAN FIELDS 


‘(mty jo snakdeg) yodaqoy-joqyog 


RRR oe NG 


sae 
| = CO ee 


RR 


seas IM 


en Coe 


pe C 


SEGGEGZRGI I 


WwW = 


~~ 


Sp 


ZS 


we 


—~ 
ES 


is 


TALULA 


— 


a}S, 
We» 
EIISIGLDGOGSR 
=~. In 
SOE 


: = 


Chap. cx.] THE ELYSIAN FIELDS 323 


The vignette in the Papyrus of Anhai (sheet 6) has some 
further interesting variants, and may be thus described :— 

(1) Anhai seated in a boat with her husband, who is rowing 
it towards two gods who probably represent her father and 
mother; the handles of the oars terminate in heads of hawks. 
Behind them stands the god Thoth, ibis-headed, who holds the 
symbol of life in his right hand, and a sceptre in his left; he is 


called the “lord of divine words” <= 7 , To the left is 


the lady Anhai, with her hair falling over her face, bowing 
before two divine beings; one of these is “ her mother Neferitu,” 


S\— j Ss d ere and the other is probably her 
es) ok VO 


father. Hence we may assume that the Egyptians expected to 
meet and to know their relatives in the world beyond the 
grave. Behind Anhai isa male figure digging in a mound of 
earth ; he is probably her husband. (2) The lady Anhai, stand- 
ing by the side of a table of offerings, with her hands raised in 
,adoration before a seated god, who is here the representative 
of “the gods, the lords of the Tuat”; before him, on a table, 
are a libation vase and a lotus, and between the god and Anhai 
stands the bennu bird on his accustomed perch. In the field 
close by are growing two kinds of cereals, i.e., red barley and 
wheat; Anhai’s husband is reaping the wheat, and Anhai 
herself follows behind with what is, apparently, a rush basket 
or bag. (3) A field intersected by a portion of a stream, on 
each side of which Anhai is seen ploughing witha yoke of oxen. 
In the text above the deceased says, “‘ May I come therein, and 
“may my soul follow after me [and obtain] divine food. May 
“T plough therein and reap therein, even I, the singer of Amen, 
“ Anhai, triumphant.” (4) A field wherein are four lakes, the 
names of which are not given, two granaries, and two small 
islands. The upper island is the “birthplace of the god of the 
city,” and the lower the abode of the company of the gods who 
are here represented by four of their number. On the bank of one 
canal stand two bennu birds, and at theend of an arm of the river 
is moored a boat wherein isa flight of steps ; the boat is provided 
with four oars, two being placed at the bow and two at the stern. 
sa 


324 THE ELYSIAN FIELDS [Chap, cx. 


Text: (1) HERE BEGIN THE CHAPTERS OF SEKHET- 
HETEPET, AND THE CHAPTERS OF COMING FORTH BY 
Day; OF GOING INTO AND OF COMING OUT FROM THE 
UNDERWORLD; OF comING To SeKHeT-AARU; OF 
BEING IN SEKHET-(2)HETEPET, THE MIGHTY CITY, THE 
LADY OF WINDS; OF HAVING POWER THERE; OF BE- 
COMING A KHU THERE; OF PLOUGHING THERE; OF 
REAPING THERE; OF EATING THERE; OF DRINKING 
THERE ; OF MAKING LOVE (3) THERE; AND OF DOING 
EVERYTHING EVEN AS A MAN DOETH UPON EARTH. 
Behold the scribe and artist of the Temple of Ptah, 
Nebseni, who (4) saith :— 

“Set hath taken possession of Horus, who looked 
“with the two eyes upon the building (?) round Sekhet- 
“hetep, but I have unfettered Horus [and taken him 
.“from] Set, and Set hath opened the ways of the two 
‘eyes [which are| in heaven. (5) Set hath cast (?) his 
‘moisture to the winds upon the soul [who hath] his 
“day (or his eye) and who dwelleth in the city of Mert, 
“and he hath delivered the interior of the body of Horus 
“from the Akeru gods. Behold me (6) now, for I 
“make this mighty boat to travel over the Lake of 
“Hetep, and I brought it away with might from the 
“palace of Shu; the domain of his stars groweth young 
“and reneweth its former strength. I have brought the 
“boat (7) into the lakes thereof so that I may come 
“forth into the cities thereof, and I have sailed into 
“their divine city Lletep. And behold, it is because I, 
‘even I, am at peace with his seasons, and with his 


Chap. cx. ] THE ELYSIAN FIELDS 325 


SID SN Sere Te FETAL UD tu 


Apia eSNG ie NZ ER 


ne Wceniine 


\ 


NYA 
al 
5 Wi r 
Sa er Whe Tue) We setiti OF! 
cyl eell Hele See 
a 


o 
- 
sy n 


ET lls 


% 
a 
ny 3 " q 
ee (US oN ® Mees ayo t 
Se ecaentnn ao kaas fb om Aone 


eve “Hees Vout le | 


pL ipo 


, E " / u DS 
Pca TTR RE aD 
| ait . Hf , 
‘ 4} V1 vie) 
a Pee E CTR TS RTE ET 


Sekhet-hetepet (Papyrus of Anhai). 


Chap. cx. ] THE ELYSIAN FIELDS 327 


“onidance, and with his territory, and with the com- 
“pany of the gods who (8) are his firstborn. He maketh 
“the two divine fighters (i.e., Horus and Set) to be at 
“ peace with those who watch over the living ones whom 
“he hath created in fair form, and he bringeth peace 
[with him]; he maketh the two divine fighters to be 
“at peace with those who watch over (9) them. He 
“eutteth off the hair from the divine fighters, he driveth 
“away storm from the helpless, and he keepeth away 
“harm from the Khus. (10) Let me gain dominion 
“within that Field, for I know it, and I have sailed 
“among its lakes so that I might come into its cities. 
“My mouth is strong; and I am equipped [with 
‘‘weapons to use] against the Khus; let them not 
“have dominion over me. (11) Let me be rewarded 
“with thy fields, O thou god Hetep; that which is thy 
“wish shalt thou do, O lord of the winds. May I 
“become a khu therein, may I eat therein, may I drink 
“therein, (12) may I plough therein, may I reap therein, 
“may I fight therein, may I make love therein, may my 
“words be mighty therein, may I never be in a state of 
“servitude therein, (13) but may I .be in authority 
“therein. Thou hast made strong (?) the mouth and 
“the throat (?) of the god Hetep; Qetetbu is its (?) 
“name. He is stablished upon the watery supports (?) 
‘of the god Shu, and is linked unto the pleasant things 
“of Ra. (14) He is the divider of years, he is hidden 
“of mouth, his mouth is silent, that which he uttereth 
“is secret, he fulfilleth eternity and taketh possession of 


328 THE ELYSIAN FIELDS (Chap. ex. 
‘‘everlastingness of existence as Hetep, the lord Hetep. 
“The god Horus (15) maketh himself to be strong lke 
“unto the Hawk which is one thousand cubits in length 
“and two thousand [cubits in width] in life; he hath 
“equipments with him, and he journeyeth on and 
“cometh where the seat of his (16) heart wisheth in 
“the Pools thereof and in the cities thereof. He was 
‘begotten in the birth-chamber of the god of the city, 
“he hath offerings [made unto him] of the food. of the 
“ood of the city, he performeth that which it is meet 
‘“‘to do therein, and the union thereof, in the matter of 
“everything of the birth-chamber (17) of the divine 
“city. When [he] setteth in life like crystal he per- 
“formeth everything therein, and these things are like 
“unto the things which are done in the Lake of double 
“Fire, wherein there is none that rejoiceth, and wherein 
“are all manner of (18) evil things. The god Hetep 
“ooeth in, and cometh out, and goeth backwards |in] 
“that Field which gathered together all manner of 
“things for the birth-chamber of the god of the city. 
“When he setteth in life like (19) crystal he performeth 
‘‘all manner of things therein which are like unto the 
“things which are done in the Lake of double Fire, 
“wherein there is none that rejoiceth, and wherein are 
“no evil things whatsoever. [Let me] live with the 
‘ood Hetep, (20) clothed and not despoiled by the lords 
‘of the north (?), and may the lords of divine things 
‘bring food unto me; may he make me to go forward 
“and may I come forth, and may he bring my power to 


THE ELYSIAN FIELDS 


Chap. cx. ] 


SoH trile Ne 


eee 


OL 


a 


i 


(‘poe 2h a le a Un, ey} WOT) 


MMT, nT 


‘qgodoqoy-oqyeg 


LEA TR 


ie ul 
pms 4 


oo WSF - ~ Th 


y 


TA 


Y a 


Chap. ex.] THE ELYSIAN FIELDS BOT 


“me (21) there, and may I receive it, and may my 
“equipment be from the god Hetep. May I gain the 
“mastery over the great and mighty word which is in 
“my body in this my place, and by it I will (22) 
“remember and I will forget. Let me go forward 
“on my journey, 
“and let me 


TIMMMOT | 


“plough. I am 
“at peace in the 
“divine city,! 
“and I know the 
“waters, cities, 
(23) nomes, and 
“Jakes which are 
“in Sekhet - he - a bs eae Lia 

“tep. I exist therein, I am strong therein, I become a 
“Khu therein, I eat therein, I sow (24) seed therein, I 
“reap the harvest therein, I plough therein, I make 
“love therein, I am at peace with the god Hetep 
“therein. Behold (25) I scatter seed therein, I sail 
“about among its Lakes and I come forward to the 
“cities thereof, O divine Hetep. Behold, my mouth is 
‘equipped with my horns [for teeth], grant me an over- 
“flowing supply of the food whereon the fas and khus 
(26) [live]. I have passed the judgment of Shu upon 
“him that knoweth him, so that I may go forth to the 
“cities thereof, and may sail about among its lakes and 
“may walk about in Sekhet-hetep ; (27) and behold, Ra 


! Or, ‘*I am at peace with the god of the city.” 


332 THE ELYSIAN FIELDS [Chap. ex. 


“is in heaven, and behold, the god Hetep is its double 
“offering. I have come onward to its land, I have put 
“on my girdle (?), [ have come forth so that the gifts 
“which are about to be given unto me may be (28) 
“given, I have made gladness for myself. I have laid 
“hold upon my 
“strength which 
“the god Hetep 
‘hath greatly in- 
“creased for me. 
“() Unen-em- 
“hetep,! I have 
“entered into 


J “thee and my 

Deceased adoring Osiris (Turin Papyrus). “ son] (29) fol- 
“Joweth after me, and my divine food is upon both my 
“hands, O Lady of the two lands,? who stablishest my 
‘word whereby I remember and forget; (30) I would 
“Jive without injury, without any injury [being done] 
“unto me, O grant to me, O do thou grant to me, joy 
“of heart. Make thou me to be at peace, bind thou up 
“my sinews and muscles, and make me to receive the 
“(31) air. O Unfen]em-hetep, thou Lady of the 
‘winds, I have entered into thee and I have opened 
‘““(i.e, shown) my head. Ra falleth asleep, but I am 
“awake, and there is the goddess Hast at the gate of 


1 T.e., ‘* Existence in Peace,” the name of the first large section 
of the Klysian Fields. 
2 The name of a Pool in the second section of the Elysian Fields. 


Chap. cx. | THE ELYSIAN FIELDS 3543" 


“heaven (32) by night. Obstacles have been set before 
“me, but I have gathered together what he hath 
“emitted. I am in my city. O Nut-urt, I have 
“entered into thee, and I have counted my harvest, 
‘¢(33) and I go forward to Uakh.2. Iam the Bull en- 
“veloped in tur- 
“quoise, the lord 
“of the Field of 
“the Bull, the 
“lord of the di- 
“vine speech of 
“the goddess 
“Septet (Sothis) 
“(34) at her Deceased adoring two of the children of Horus 
“hours. O Uakh, Aare es 

“T have entered into thee, I have eaten my bread, I 
“have gotten the mastery over choice pieces of the flesh 
“of oxen and of feathered fowl, and the birds of Shu 
“have been given unto (35) me; I follow after the 
“gods and [I come after] the divine kas. O Tchefet,* 
“JT have entered into thee. I array myself in apparel 
(36), and I gird myself with the sa garment of ha; 
“now, behold, [he is] in heaven, and those who dwell 
“therein follow Ra, and [I] follow Ra in heaven. O 
“Unen-em-(37)hetep, lord of the two lands, [ have 
“entered into thee, and I have plunged into the lakes 


1 The name of a Pool in the first section of the Elysian Fields. 
2 The name of a Pool in the second section of the Elysian Iields. 
® The name of a district in the third section of the Elysian Fields. 


334 THE ELYSIAN FIELDS [Chap. cx. 
‘of Tchesert ; behold me, for all filth hath departed 
“from me. The Great God (38) groweth therein, and 
“behold, I have found [food therein]; I have snared 
“feathered fowl 
“and I feed upon 
“the finest [of 
“them]. O Qen- 
“qentet,! (39) I 
“have entered 
“into thee, and 


Deceased adoring two of the children of Horus “T have seen 
Oa hee ae “the Osiris [my 

“father], and I have gazed upon my mother, and I 
“have made love. I have caught the worms and 
“serpents, and I am delivered. (40) And I know the 
“name of the god who is opposite to the goddess 
“Tchesert, and who hath straight hair and is equipped 
“with two horns ; he reapeth, and I both plough (41) 
“and reap. O Hast, I have entered into thee, I have 
“driven back those who would come to the turquoise 
‘““Isky],fand I have followed the winds of the company 
“of the gods. The Great God hath given my head 
(42) unto me, and he who hath bound on me my head 
‘‘is the Mighty one who hath turquoise (?) eyes, namely, 
“ Ari-en-ab-f (i.2., he doeth as he pleaseth), O Usert,? 
“T have come into thee at the head of the house wherein 
(43) divine food is brought for me. © Smam,? I have 


' The name of a Pool in the first section of the Elysian Fields. 
? The name of a Pool in the third section of the Elysian Fields. 


Chap. cxi. | THE BLYSIAN FIELDS see 


“come into thee. My heart watcheth, my head is 
“equipped with the white crown, I am _ led -into 
“celestial regions, and I make to flourish (44) terres- 
“trial objects, and there is joy of heart for the Bull, 
“and for celestial beings, and for the company of the 
“oods. I am the god who is the Bull, the lord of the 
“gods, as he goeth forth from the turquoise [sky]. O 
“divine nome of wheat and barley, (45) I have come 
“into thee, I have come forward to thee, and I have 
“taken up that which followeth me, namely, the best of 
“the libations of the company of the gods. I have tied 
“up my boat in the celestial lakes, (46) I have lifted 
“up the post at which to anchor, I have recited the 
‘“preseribed words with my voice, and I have ascribed 
“praises unto the gods who dwell in Sekhet-hetep.” 


CHAPTER CXI. 


In the Theban Recension this Chapter has not as 
yet been found. In the Saite Recension it is called 
“The Chapter of knowing the Souls of Pe,” but an 
examination of the text shows that it is identical with 
that of Chapter CVIIL; it has no vignette. 


336 OF KNOWING THE SOULS OF PE [Chap cxu,x 


CHAPTER CXII. 


[ From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 18). ] 


GHA & 


fF Fi 


Vignette: The gods Horus (hawk-headed), Mestha, and 
Hapi, seated. 


Text: (1) ANOTHER CHAPTER OF KNOWING THE 
Sours or Pr. The overseer of the house of the 
overseer of the seal, Nu, triumphant, saith :— 

“THail,| Khat, who dwellest in Khat, in Anpet,! and 
“in the nome of Khat! [Hail,] ye goddesses of the 
“chase (2) who dwell in the city of Pe, ye celestial 
“lands (?), ye stars, and ye divine beings, who give 
‘cakes and ale (?), do ye know (3) for what reason the 
“city of Pe hath been given unto Horus? I, even I, 
“know, though ye know it not. Behold, Ra gave the 
“city unto him in return for (4) the injury in his eye, 
“for which cause Ra said to Horus, ‘ Let me see what 
“js coming to pass in thine eye,’ and forthwith he 
“looked thereat. Then Ra said (5) to Horus, ‘ Look 


1 A name of the city of Mendes, the metropolis of the sixteenth 
nome of Lower Egypt. 


Chap. cxii. 13] OF KNOWING THE SOULS OF PE Sve 


“at that black pig,’ and he looked, and straightway an 
_ “injury was done unto his eye, [namely,] (6) a mighty 
“storm [took place]. Then said Horus unto Ra, 
“Verily, my eye seems as if it were an eye upon 
“which Suti had inflicted a blow’; [and thus saying] 
“he ate (7) his heart."| Then said Ra to those gods, 
“* Place ye him in his chamber, and he shall do well.’ 
“Now the black pig was Suti who had transformed 
“himself into a (8) black pig, and he it was who had 
“aimed the blow of fire which was in the eye of Horus. 
“Then said Ra unto those gods, ‘The pig is an 
“abominable thing unto Horus; (9) O but he shall 
“do well although the pig is an abomination unto him.’ 
“Then the company of the gods, who were among the 
“ divine followers of Horus when he existed in the form of 
“his own child, said, (10) ‘ Let sacrifices be made [to 
“the gods] of his bulls, and of his goats, and of his pigs. 
“ Now the father of Mesthi, Hapi, Tuamautef, (11) and 
“ Qebhsennuf is Horus, and their mother is Isis. Then 
“said Horus to Ra, ‘Give me two divine brethren in 
“the city of Pe and two divine brethren in the city of 
“Nekhen, (12) who [have sprung] from my body and 
“who shall be with me in the guise of everlasting 
“judges, then shall the earth blossom and thunder- 
“clouds and rain be blotted out.’ And the name of 
“ Horus became ‘ Her-uatch-f’ (7.c., Prince of his emerald 
stone). I, even I, (13) know the Souls of Pe, namely, 
“ Horus, Mesthi, and [Hapi.” 
1 T.e., he lost his temper and raged. 


VOL. If, i 


338 OF KNOWING THE SOULS OF NEKHEN [Chvexiii.r 


CHAPTER CXIII. 
[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 18). ] 
GANS Yi 
fi 


— 
/ >} 


ye 


Gx QA. 
ip 


Vignette : The gods Horus, Tuamautef and Qebhsennuf. 


Text: (1) Tur CHAPTER OF KNOWING THE SOULS 
or Nexuen. The overseer of the house of the overseer 
of the seal, Nu, triumphant, saith :— (2) 


“T know the hidden things of the city of Nekhen, 
“that is to say, the things which the mother of Horus 
‘did for him, and how she [made her voice to go forth] 
“over the waters, saying, ‘Speak ye unto me concern- 
“ing the judgment which is upon me, [and show me] 
“the path behind you, and let me discover [it]’; and 
“how Ra said, ‘This son of Isis hath perished’; and 
“what the mother of Horus did for him [when] she 
‘cried out, saying, (3) ‘Sebek, the lord of the papyrus 
‘swamp, shall be brought to us.’ [And Sebek] fished 
“for them and he found them, and the mother of Horus 
“made them to grow in the places to which they be- 
“Jonged. Then Sebek, the lord of his papyrus swamp, 


Ch, cxii'. ro] OF KNOWING THE SOULS OF NEKHEN 339 


“said, ‘I went and I found the place where they had 
“passed with my fingers on the edge of the waters, and 
“T enclosed them in [my] net: (4) and strong was that 
“net.’ And Ra said, ‘ So, then, there are fish with the 
“ood Sebek, and [he] hath found the hands and arms 
“of (5) Horus for him in the land of fish’; and [that] 
“land became the land of the city of Remu (i.e., Fish). 
“And Ra said, ‘A land of the pool, a land of the 
“pool to this net. Then were the hands of Horus 
“brought to him (6) at the uncovering of his face at 
“the festivals of the month and half month in the 
“Qand of Remu. And Ra said, ‘I give the city of 
“ Nekhen to Horus for the habitation of his two arms 
“and hands, and his face shall be uncovered (7) before 
“his two hands and arms in the city of Nekhen; and I 
‘oive into his power the slaughtered beings who are in 
“them at the festivals of the month and half month,’ 
“Then Horus said, ‘ Let me carry off (8) Tuamautet 
“and Qebhsennuf, and let them watch over my body; 
“and if they are allowed to be there, then shall they 
“be subservient to the god of the city of Nekhen.’ (9) 
“ And Ra said, ‘It shall be granted unto thee there and 
“in the city of Senket (7.c., Sati), and there shall be 
“done for them what hath been done for those who 
“dwell in the city of Nekhen, and verily they shall be 
“with thee.” (10) And Horus said, ‘They have been 
“with thee and [now] they shall be with me, and shall 
“hearken unto the god Suti when he calleth upon the 
“Souls of Nekhen.’ Grant to me [that I, even I, may 


340 OF KNOWING THE SOULS OF KHEMENNU [Ch. exiii. rr 


pass on to the Souls of Nekhen, and that I may un- 
“loose the bonds of Horus]. I, even I, know the Souls 
“of Nekhen, namely, (11) Horus, Tuamautef, and 
** Qebhsennuf.” 


CHAPTER CXIV. 


[From the Papyrus of Nebseni (Brit. Mus. No. 9900, sheet 7). } 


Vignette : Three ibis-headed gods. In the Saite Recension 

the deceased is standing, with both hands raised in adoration, 

before the gods Thoth, Sa, and Tem (see Lepsius, op. cit., 
Bl. 43). 

Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF KNOWING THE SOULS 
or KuemeEnnv (Hermopolis). 

(2) The goddess Maat is carried by the arm at the 
“shining of the goddess Neith in the city of Mentchat, 
“and at the shining (3) of the Hye when it is weighed. 
‘‘T am carried over by it and I know what it bringeth 
‘from the city of Kesi,' (4) and I will neither declare 
“it unto men nor tell it unto the gods. I have come, 


1 T.e., Cusae, the metropolis of the fourteenth nome of Upper 
Egypt. 


Ch, cxiv.9] OF KNOWING THE SOULS OF KHEMENNU 341 


“being the envoy of Ra, to stablish (5) Maat upon the 
“arm at the shining of Neith in the city of Mentchat 
“and to adjudge the eye to him that shall scrutinize it. 
“JT have come as (6) a power through the knowledge of 
“the Souls of Khemennu (Hermopolis) who love to know 
“what ye love. I know Maat, (7) which hath germi- 
“nated, and hath become strong, and hath been judged, 
“and I have joy in passing judgment upon the things 
“which are to be judged. Homage to you, O ye Souls 
“of Khemennu, I, even I, know (8) the things which 
“are unknown on the festivals of the month and half 
“month. Ra knoweth the hidden things of the night, 
“and know ye that it is Thoth who hath made me to 
“have knowledge. (9) Homage to you, O ye Souls of 
‘“Khemennu, since I know you each day.” 


CHAPTER CXV. 
[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 18). ] 


Vignette: Inthe Papyrus of Nu this Chapter has no vignette. 

In the Saite Recension the deceased is standing, with both 

hands raised in adoration, before the gods Ra, Shu, and Tefnut 
(see Lepsius, op. cit., B!, 44). 


242 OF KNOWING THE SOULS OF ANNU [Chap. cxy. x 
3+ 


Text: (1) Tue CHAPTER oF COMING FORTH FROM 
HEAVEN, AND OF MAKING A WAY THROUGH THE AMME- 
HET, AND OF KNOWING THE Souts or Annu (Hxxto- 
Pouis). ‘The overseer of the house of the overseer of 
the seal, Nu, triumphant, saith :— (2) 

“T have passed the day since yesterday among the 
“oreat divine beings, and I have come into being along 
“with the god Khepera. [My] face is uncovered before 
“the Hye, the only One, and the orbit of the night hath 
“been opened. (3) I am a divine being among you. I 
“know the Souls of Annu. Shall not the god Ur-ma 
‘pass over it as [he] journeyeth (4) forward with 
“vigour? Have I not overcome (?), and have I not 
“snoken to the gods? Behold, he that is the heir of 
“Annu hath been destroyed. JI, even I, know for what 
‘reason was made the lock of hair of the (5) Man. Ra 
“spake unto the god Ami-haf, and an injury was. done 
“unto his mouth, that is to say, he was wounded in 
“Tthat| mouth. And Ra spake (6) unto the god Ami- 
‘haf, saying, ‘O heir of men, receive [thy| harpoon’ ; 
‘and the harpoon-house came into being. Behold, O 
“ood Ami-haf, two divine brethren have come into 
“being, [that is to say| (7) Senti-Ra came into being, 
“and Setem-ansi-f came into being. And his hand 
“stayed not, and he made his form into that of a 
“woman with a lock of hair (8) which became the 
‘divine lock in Annu, and which became the strong 
“and mighty one in this temple; and it became the 
“strong one of Annu, and it became the heir of (9) the 


Ch, cxvi.3] OF KNOWING THE SOULS OF KHEMENNU 343 


“heir of Ur-maat-f (7.2, the mighty one of the two 
“eyes), and it became before him the god Ur-ma of 
“Annu. I know the Souls of Annu, (10) namely, Ra, 
“Shu, and Tefnut.” 


CHAPTER CXVI. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 18). ] 


Vignette: The deceased adoring three ibis-headed gods. In 

the Saite Recension the deceased is standing, with both hands 

raised in adoration, before the gods Thoth, Sa, and Tem (see 
Lepsius, op. cit., Bl. 44). 

Text: (1) ANOTHER CHAPTER OF KNOWING THE 
Souts or Kuemennu (Hermorotis). The overseer of 
the house of the overseer of the seal, Nu, triumphant, 
saith :— (2) 

“The goddess Neith shineth in Matchat, and the 
‘“‘ooddess Maat is carried by the arm of him who eateth 

8 y ; 
“the Eye, and who is its divine judge, and the Sem 
“priest carrieth (3) me over upon it. I will not declare 
“it unto men, and I wil) not tell it unto the gods; I will 


344 OF KNOWING THE SOULS OF KHEMENNU [Ch exvi. 4 


“not declare it unto men, and I will not tell it unto the 
‘“oods. I have entered in being an ignorant man, and 
‘“‘T have seen the hidden things. (4) Homage to you, 
“O ye gods who dwell in Khemennu, ye know me even 
“as I know the goddess Neith, and [ye give] to the 
‘Hye the growth which endureth. (5) There is joy [to 
“Tme]| at the judgment of the things which are to be 
“judged. I, even I, know the Souls of Annu; they 
“are great at the festival of the month, and are little 
“at the festival of the half month. They are Thoth 
(6) the Hidden One, and Sa, and Tem.” 

RUBRIC: If this chapter be known [by the deceased] offal 


shall be an abomination unto him, and he shall not drink filthy 
water. 


CHAPTER CXVII. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 9). ] 


Vignette: The deceased, holding a staff in his left hand, 

about to walk up one side of a hill of the horizon. In the 

Saite Recension the god Anubis is leading the deceased to a 
shrine which is set on a hill (see Lepsius, op. e7t., Bl. 44). 


Chap. cxvii.] WALKING IN THE UNDERWORLD 345 


Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF RECEIVING PATHS 
[WHEREON TO WALK] IN Re-stav.. The overseer of 
the house of the overseer of the seal, Nu, triumphant, 
saith :— (2) 

“The paths which are above me [lead] to Re-stau. 
“Tam he who is girt about with his girdle and who 
“cometh forth from the | goddess of] the Ureret crown. 
“T have come, and I have stablished things in Abtu 
‘“(Abydos), (3) and I have opened out paths in Re-stau. 
“The god Osiris hath eased my pains. I am he who 
“maketh the waters to come into being, and who 
“setteth his throne [thereon], and who maketh his 
“path through the funeral valley and through the 
“Great Lake. (4) I have made my path, and indeed 
“T am [Osiris]. 

“Osiris was victorious over his enemies, and the 
“Osiris Nebget is victorious over his enemies. He 
“hath become as one of yourselves, [O ye gods], his 
“protector is the Lord of eternity, he walketh even as 
“ve walk, he standeth even as ye stand, he sitteth 
“even as ye sit, and he talketh even as ye talk in the 
“presence of the Great God, the Lord of Amentet. | oe 


‘The words in brackets are from the Papyrus of Neb-qet 
(sheet 3). 


346 OF COMING FORTH FROM RE-STAU_ [Chap. exviii. 


CHAPTER CXVIII. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 9). ] 


LZ 


Vignette ; The deceased holding a staff in his left hand. In 
the Saite Recension this Chapter has no vignette. 


Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF COMING FORTH FROM 
tn-sTau. ‘he overseer of the house of the overseer of 
the seal, Nu, triumphant, saith :— 


“T was born in (2) Re-stau, and splendour hath been 
‘“‘oiven unto me by those who dwell in their spiritual 
“bodies (sdhu) in the habitation where libations are 
“made unto Osiris. ‘he divine ministers who are in 
‘Re-stau shall receive [me] (3) when Osiris is led into 
“the twofold funeral region of Osiris; O let me be a 
“divine being whom they shall lead into the twofold 


“funeral region of Osiris.” 


Chap. cxix.4] OF COMING FORTH FROM RE-STAU 347 


CHAPTER CXIX. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 9). ] 


i 
= 
é 
= 


Vignette : The deceased adoring the god Osiris who stands 

in a shrine. In the Saite Recension the deceased is walking 

away from a shrine which is set upon a hill (see Lepsius, 
op. cit., Bl. 44). 


Text: (1) Tur CHAPTER OF COMING FORTH FROM 
Re-stav.! The overseer of the house of the overseer 
of the seal, Nu, triumphant, saith :— (2) 

“Tam the Great God who maketh his light. I have 

“come to thee, O Osiris, and I offer praise unto (3) 
“thee. [I am] pure from the issues which are carried 
“away from thee. ‘Thy name is made in Re-stau, and 
“thy power is in Abtu (Abydos), Thou art raised up, 
“then, O Osiris, (4) and thou goest round about through 

1 A fuller title of this Chapter is, ‘‘The Chapter of knowing the 


name of Osiris, and of going into and of coming forth from 
Re-stau.” 


348 OF KNOWING OSIRIS’S NAME [Chap. cxix. 


“heaven with Ra, and thou lookest upon the genera- 
“tions of men, O thou One who circlest, thou Ra. 
“Behold, verily I have said unto thee, O Osiris, ‘I am 
(5) the spiritual body of the God, and I say, ‘Let it 
“come to pass that I shall never be repulsed before 
‘“‘thee, O Osiris.’ ” 

The following is the Chapter in a fuller form :—1? 


(1) Tur CHAPTER OF KNOWING THE NAME OF OsIRIs 
AND OF ENTERING INTO AND OF GOING OUT FROM RzE- 
STAU [IN ALL THE FORMS WHEREIN HE WILLETH TO 
COME FoRTH].” The scribe, Mes-em-neter, triumphant, 
saith :— (2) 

“T am the Great Name who maketh (3) his light. I 
“have come to thee, O Osiris, and I offer praise unto 
“thee. Iam pure from the issues which are carried 
“away from thee. [Thy] name hath been made in Re- 
‘stau when it hath fallen (4) therein. Homage to thee, 
“O Osiris, in thy strength and in thy power, thou hast 
“obtained the mastery in Re-stau. Thou art raised 
“up, O Osiris, in thy (5) might and in thy power, thou 
“art raised up, O Osiris, and thy might is in Re-stau, 
“and thy power is in Abtu (Abydos). Thou goest 
“round about through heaven, and (6) thou sailest 
“before Ra, and thou lookest upon the generations of 
“men, O thou Being who circlest, thou Ra. Behold, 
“verily I have said unto thee, O Osiris, ‘I am the 

' For the text see Naville, op. cit., Bd. T. BL. 130. 


2 The words in brackets are from the Papyrus of Amen-em-heb 
(see Naville, op. cit., Bd. II. p. 267). 


Chap. exx., exxi.] OF KNOWING OSIRIS’S NAME 349 


“spiritual body of the God, and I say, ‘ Let it come 
“to pass that I shall never be repulsed before thee, O 


>» 


“ Osiris. 


CHAPTER CXX. 


Vignette: This Chapter is without a vignette both in the 
Theban and Saite Recensions, 


Text: In the Saite Recension this Chapter is given 
twice ; see Lepsius, op. cit., BI. 3 and 45, and supra, 
Chapter XII. 


CHAPTER CXXI. 


Vignette: This Chapter is without a vignette both in the 
Theban and Saite Recensions, 


Text: In the Saite Recension this Chapter is given 
twice ; see Lepsius, op. cit., Bll. 4 and 45, and supra 
Chapter XIII. 


350 OF GOING INTO THE UNDERWORLD [Ch. exxii. x 


CHAPTER CXXII. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 9). ] 


Vignette : The Papyrus of Nu is the only document contain- 

ing the Theban Recension which is known, at present, to give a 

text of this Chapter, but it is without a vignette. In the Saite 

Recension the deceased is bowing before a shrine which is set 
upon a hill (see Lepsius, op. c7t., Bl. 45). 


Text: ‘(1) Tue CHAPTER OF GOING IN AFTER 
COMING FORTH [FROM THE UNDERWORLD]. The oyer- 
seer of the house of the overseer of the seal, Nu, 
triumphant, saith :— (2) 

“Open unto me!” Who then art thou? Whither 
goest thou? Whatis thy name? “Iam one of you, 
“Assembler of Souls’ is the name of my boat; (3) 
““* Making the hair to stand on end’ is the name of the 
“oars; ‘ Watchful one’ is the name of its bows; ‘ Evil 
“is it’ is the name of the rudder; ‘Steering straight 
“for the middle’ is the name of (4) the Matchabet; so 
“likewise’[the boat] is a type of my sailing onward to 


Ch. exxii.7] AFTER COMING OUT THEREFROM S51 


“the pool. Let there be given unto me vessels of milk, 
(5) together with cakes, and loaves of bread, and cups 
“of drink, and pieces of meat in the Temple of Anpu,” 
or (as others say), “Grant thou me [these things] 
“wholly. Let it be so done unto me that I may 
“enter in (6) like a hawk, and that I may come 
“forth like the Bennu bird, [and like] the Morning 
“Star. Let me make [my] path so that [I] may go in 
“peace into the beautiful Amentet, and let the Lake 
“of Osiris be mine. (7) Let me make my path, and 
“let me enter in, and let me adore Osiris, the Lord of 
“life.” ! 


CHAPTER CXXIII. on CXXXIX? 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 15). ] 


Vignette: The deceased, or his soul, standing before a palace 
or shrine; in the Saite Recension this Chapter has no vignette. 


! Several passages in this Chapter are also found in Chapter LVIII. 

2 This Chapter occurs twice in the Saite Recension ; see Lepsius, 
op. cit., Bll. 45 and 57. As Chap. CXXIII. it is called ‘‘ Another 
Chapter,” but as Chap. CXXXIX. it is called ‘‘A hymn of praise 
to Tem.” 


352 OF ENTERING THE GREAT HOUSE (Chap, exxiii, 


Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF ENTERING INTO THE 
Great Hovuss.' The overseer of the house of the over- 
seer of the seal, Nu, triumphant, saith :— 

“Homage to thee, O Thoth. I am Thoth, who have 
“weighed the two divine Fighters (i.e, Horus and 
“ Set), (2) [have destroyed their warfare and I have 
‘diminished their wailings. I have delivered the Atu 
“fish in his turning back, and I have performed that 
“which thou didst order (3) concerning him, and after- 
“wards I lay down within my eye. [I am he who hath 
“been without opposition. I have come; do thou look 
“upon me in the Temple of Nem-hra (or Uhem-hra). | 
‘T give commands in the words of the divine aged ones, 
‘and, moreover, I guide for thee the lesser deities.” 


1 Two copies of this Chapter taken from royal tombs are given 
by Naville with Chapter CXXV. (Ueberschrift) ; see Todtentuch, 
Bd. II., p. 335. 


« 


Chap. exxiv.4] OF ENTERING BEFORE OSIRIS 353 


CHAPTER CXXIV. 


{From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus, No. 10,477, sheet 10). ] 


Vignette : The deceased adoring Mestha, Hapi, Tuamautef 
and Qebhsennuf,! 


Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF GOING INTO THE 
PRESENCE OF THE DIVINE SOVEREIGN PRINCES OF 
Osiris. (2) The overseer of the house of the overseer 
of the seal, Nu, triumphant, saith :— 


“My soul hath built for me a habitation in the city 
“of Tattu; I sow seed in the city of Pe, and (3) I 
“plough my field with my labourers (?), and for this 
‘reason my palm tree is like Amsu. That which is an 
“abomination unto me, that which is an abomination 
“unto me I shall not eat. (4) That which is an abo- 
“mination unto me, that which is an abomination unto 
“me is filth. I shall not eat thereof; by sepulchral 

1 In the Papyrus of Nu Chapter CXXIV. is given under the title, 
‘¢ Chapter of making the transformation into a Bennu bird,” and 


the vignette above it is a Bennu bird. In the vignette here given 
the artist has omitted a god. 


VOL. II. K 


354 OF ENTERING BEFORE OSIRIS _ [Chap. exxiv. 5 


‘meals and food I shall not be destroyed. [The abo- 
‘minable thing]|I shall not take into my hands, (5) I 
‘shall not walk upon it in my sandals, because my 
“cakes are [made] of white grain, and my ale is [made] 
“of red grain, and behold, (6) the Sektet boat and the 
“ Matet boat bring them to me, and I eat [thereof] 
‘‘under the branches of [the trees], the beautiful arms 
“lof which| I know. 0 let (7) splendour be prepared 
“for me with the white crown which is lifted up upon 
“me by the uraei-goddesses. Hail, thou guardian of 
“the divine doors of the god Sehetep-taui (7.e., ‘he who 
“maketh the world to be at peace’), bring thou (8) to 
“me that of which they make sepulchral meals; grant 
“thou that I may lift up the branches (?). (9) May the 
“ood of light open to me his arms, and may the com- 
‘pany of the gods keep silence whilst the denizens (10) 
“of heaven tall with the overseer of the house of the 
“overseer of the seal, Nu, triumphant. I am the leader 
‘of the hearts of the gods who strengthen (11) me, 
“and I am a mighty one among the divine beings. If 
“any god or any goddess (12) shall come forth against 
‘‘me he shall be judged by the ancestors of the year 
“who live upon hearts (13) and who make (?) cakes (?) 
‘for me, and Osiris shall devour him at [his] coming 
“forth (14) from Abtu (Abydos). He shall be judged 
‘by the ancestors of Ra, and he shall be judged by the 
“(15) God of Light who clotheth heaven among the 
“divine princes. I shall have bread in my mouth at 
“stated seasons, and I shall enter in before the gods 


Chap, cxxiv.19] OF ENTERING BEFORE OSIRIS 355 


“ Ahiu. (16) He shall speak with me, and I shall 
“speak with the followers of the gods. I shall speak 
‘with the Disk and I shall speak with the denizens of 
“heaven. (17) I shall put the terror of myself into 
“the blackness of night which is in the goddess Meh- 
“urt, [who is near] him that dwelleth in might. (18) 
“And behold, I shall be there with Osiris. My con- 
“dition of completeness shall be his condition of com- 
“pleteness among the divine princes. I shall speak 
“unto him [with] the words of (19) men, and he shall 
“repeat unto me the words of the gods, A hw who is 
“equipped | with power] shall come.’ I am a khu who 
“is equipped [with power]; I am equipped [with the 
power] of all the ‘hus, [being the form of the Sadhu 
“(i.e,, spiritual bodies) of Annu, Tattu, Suten-henen, 
“Abtu, Apu, and Sennu. The Osiris Auf-ankh is 
“victorious over every god and every goddess who are 
“hidden in Neter-khertet |.” * 


CHAPTER CXXY. 


The CXXVth Chapter consists of three parts: the 
Introduction, the Negative Confession, and a concluding 
text. The Introduction was said when the deceased 
arrived at the Hall of double Maati; the Negative 


1 The Papyrus of Mes-em- -neter adds, ‘‘ bringing right unto thee 
the divine being who loveth her.” 
2 T.e., Heliopolis, Mendes or Busiris, Heracleopolis, Abydos, 
Panopolis, and Sennu (a city near Panopolis). 
3 The words in brackets are from the Saite Recension (seo 
Lepsius, op. cit., Bl. 46). 


356 OF ENTERING INTO JUDGMENT  [Chap. exxv. 


Confession was recited by him before the forty-two 
gods who were in this Hall; and the concluding text 
when he came into the underworld. 


I, The Introduction. 
[From the Papyrus of Ani (Brit. Mus. No, 10,470, sheets 29 and 30). | 


iit le 


v 


= 


Vignette: The god Osiris, bearded and wearing the “white ” 
crown, stands in a shrine, the roof of which is surmounted by a 
hawk’s head and by uraei; he holds the usual emblems of 
sovereignty and dominion. Behind him is the goddess Isis, 
and before him, standing upon a lotus flower, are the four 
children of Horus, Mestha, Hapi, Tuamautef, and Qebhsennuf, 


Chap, cxxv.9] INTRODUCTORY HYMN OF PRAISE Soy! 


Text: (1) Tue CHAPTER OF ENTERING INTO THE 
HALL OF DOUBLE MAATI; A HYMN OF PRAISE TO 
OsIRIs, THE GOVERNOR oF AMENTET. Osiris, the 
scribe Ani, triumphant, saith :— 

(2) “I have come, and [I] have drawn nigh to see 
“thy beauties; my hands [are raised] in adoration of 
“thy name ‘Right and Truth. I came and I drew 
“unto [the place where] the acacia tree groweth not, 
‘where (3) the tree thick with leaves existeth not, and 
“where the ground yieldeth neither herb nor grass. 
“Then I entered into the hidden place, and I spake 
“with (4) the god Set, and my protector (?) advanced 
“to me, and his face was clothed (or covered), and [he] 
‘fell upon the hidden things. He (5) entered into the 
“Temple of Osiris, and he looked upon the hidden 
“things which were therein; and the sovereign chiefs 
“of the pylons [were] in the form of khus. And the 
“ood Anpu (6) spake [to those who were on] both sides 
“of him with the speech of a man [as he] came from 
“Ta-mera ;1 he knoweth our paths and our cities. I 
“make offerings (?), (7) and I smell the odour of him 
‘as if he were one among you, and I say unto him, I 
“am Osiris, the scribe Ani, triumphant in peace, trium- 
“phant! Ihave (8) come, and [I] have drawn nigh 
“to see the great gods, and I live upon the offerings 
“which are among their food. I have been to the 
“borders [of the territory of] (9) Ba-neb-Tettet (ce., 
“the ‘Soul, the lord of Tattu,’ or Osiris), and he hath 


1 Te., the ‘‘Land of the inundation,” a name of Egypt. 


358 INTRODUCTORY HYMN OF PRAISE [Ch. exxv, 10 


“caused me to come forth like a Bennw bird, and to 
“utter words. I have been in the water of the stream, 
“and (10) I have made offerings of incense. I have 
“euided myself to the Shenfet tree of the [divine] 
“children. I have been in Abu (or Abu, “2., Ele- 
“phantine [?]) in the Temple of the goddess Satet. 
(11) I have submerged the boat of mine enemies 
“Twhilst] I myself have sailed over the Lake in the 
‘““ Neshmet boat. I have seen the (12) Sahu (1.e., the 
“spiritual bodies) [in] the city of Qem-ur. I have 
‘been in the city of Tattu, and I have brought myself 
‘to silence [therein]. I have caused the god to have 
“the mastery over his two feet. (13) I have been in 
“the Temple of Tep-tu-f (7.e., “he that is on his hill,’ or 
“ Anubis), and I have seen him that is lord of the 
“divine temple. I have entered into the Temple (14) 
‘of Osiris, and I have arrayed myself in the apparel of 
“him that is therein. I have entered into Re-stau, 
“and I have seen the hidden things (15) which are 
“therein. JI was shrouded [therein], but I found a 
“way for myself. I have gone into the city An-aarret-f 
“(7.0., the place where nothing groweth), and I covered 
“my nakedness with the garments (16) which were 
“therein. There was given unto me the dnti unguent 
“Tsuch as] women [use]. along with the powder of 
‘human beings. Verily Sut (?) (17) hath spoken unto 
“me the things which concern himself, and I said, Let 
“thy weighing be in (?) us.” 

“The Majesty of the god Anpu saith, (18) ‘ Knowest 


Chap. cxxv. 28] INTRODUCTORY HYMN OF PRAISE 359 


“thou the name of this door so as to declare it unto 
“me?’ And Osiris, the scribe Ani, triumphant in 
“peace, triumphant! saith, (19) ‘Destroyer of the god 
“Shu? is the name (20) of this door. The Majesty of 
“the god Anpu saith, (21) ‘ Knowest thou the name of 
“the upper (22) leaf and of the lower leaf?’ ‘Lord of 
‘Maat (23) upon his two feet’ is the name of the upper 
“ (24) leaf, and ‘ Lord of twofold strength, the subduer 
“of cattle,’ (25) [is the name of the lower leaf. The 
“Majesty of the god Anpu saith], ‘Since thou knowest, 
‘*(26) pass on, O Osiris the scribe, the teller (27) of the 
‘divine offerings of all the gods of Thebes, (28) Ani, 


99) 


“triumphant, the lord of reverence. 


The Introduction. 
[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 22). ] 


raised in adoration, 


360 ADDRESS TO OSIRIS [Chap. cxxv. 


Text: (1) [THE FOLLOWING] SHALL BE SAID WHEN 
THE OVERSEER OF THE HOUSE OF THE OVERSEER OF 
THE SEAL, Nv, TRIUMPHANT, COMETH FORTH INTO 
THE HALu (2) oF DOUBLE MAATI! so THAT HE MAY 
BE SEPARATED FROM EVERY SIN WHICH HE HATH 
DONE AND MAY BEHOLD THE FACES OF THE GODS. 
The Osiris Nu, triumphant, saith :— (3) 

“ Homage to thee, O Great God, thou Lord of double 
“ Maati, I have come to thee, O my Lord, and I have 
“brought myself hither that (4) I may behold thy 
“beauties. I know thee, and I know thy name, and 
“T know the name[s] of the two and forty gods who 
“exist with (5) thee in this Hall of double Maati, who 
“live as warders of sinners and who feed upon their 
‘blood (6) on the day when the lives of men are taken 
‘into account in the presence of the god Un-nefer; in 
“truth ‘Rekhti-merti-neb-Maati’ (7.e., ‘ twin-sisters with 
“two eyes, ladies of double Maati’) is thy name. In 
‘truth (7) I have come to thee, and I have brought 
“Maat (i.e, right and truth) to thee, and I have 
“destroyed wickedness for thee. [I have not done 
“evil to] mankind. I have not oppressed the members 
‘“‘of my family, (8) I have not wrought evil in the place 
“of right and truth. I have had no knowledge of 
“worthless men. I have not wrought evil. I have 

1 In other papyri this Chapter is called :—(1) ‘‘ The Chapter of 
going into the Hall of double Maati”; (2) ‘‘ The Chapter of [the 
Hall of] double Maati and of knowing what is therein”; and 


(3) ‘*The Book of entering into the Hall of double Maati” ; see 
Naville, op. cit., Bd. II, p. 275. 


Chap. cxxv. 15] ADDRESS TO OSIRIS 361 


“not made to be the first [consideration] of each day 
“that excessive labour (9) should be performed for me. 
“(TI have] not brought forward my name for [exaltation] 
“to honours. I have not ill-treated servants. [I have 
“not thought scorn of God.] I have not defrauded the 
‘oppressed one of his property.' I have not done that 
“which is an abomination (10) unto the gods. I 
“have not caused harm to be done to the servant by 
“his chief. I have not caused pain. I have made no 
“man to suffer hunger. I have made no one to weep. 
“T have done no murder. (11) I have not given the 
“order for murder to be done for me. I have not 
“inflicted pain upon mankind. I have not defrauded 
“the temples of their oblations. I have not (12) pur- 
“Joined the cakes of the gods. I have not carried off 
“the cakes offered to the khus. I have not committed 
“fornication, I have not polluted myself [in the holy 
“places of the god of my city],? nor diminished from 
“the bushel. (13) I have neither added to nor filched 
“away land. I have not encroached upon the fields [of 
“others|. I have not added to the weights of the 
“scales [to cheat the seller]. I have not mis-read 
“the pointer of the scales [to cheat the buyer]. (14) 
“T have not carried away the milk from the mouths of 
“children. Ihave not driven away the cattle which 
“were upon their pastures. I have not snared (15) the 

1 Variant, ‘‘I haye not caused misery, I have not caused 
afHiction.” 


2 'The words in brackets are added from the Papyrus of Amen-neb 
(Brit. Mus. No. 9964) ; see Naville, op. cit., Bd. IL., p. 282. 


362 ADDRESS TO OSIRIS [Chap. exxv. 16 


“feathered fowl of the preserves of the gods. I have 
“not caught fish [with bait made of fish of their kind. 
“T have not turned back the water at the time [when 
“at should flow]. Ihave not cut (16) a cutting in a 
“canal of running water. I have not extinguished a 
“fire (or light) when it should burn. I have not vio- 
‘lated the times ' | of offering| the chosen meat-offerings. 
“T have not driven off (17) the cattle from the property 
“of the gods. I have not repulsed God in his mani- 
“‘festations. Iam pure. Iam pure. I am pure, I 
“am pure. My purity is the purity of that (18) great 
“ Bennw which is in the city of Suten-henen (Hera- 
“cleopolis), for, behold, I am the nose of the God of 
“the winds, who maketh all mankind to live on (19) 
“the day when the Eye (Utchat) of Ra is full in Annu 
(Heliopolis) at the end of the second month® of the 
“season Pert (i.e, the season of growing) [in the 
“presence of the divine lord of this earth].* I have 
“seen the Eye of Ra when it was full in Annu, there- 
‘fore let not evil befall me (20) in this land and in 
“this Hall of double Maati, because I, even I, know 
“the name[s] of these gods who are therein [and who 
“are the followers of the great god].” * 


1 Variant, ‘* I have not defrauded the gods of their chosen meat 
offerings.” 

2 T.e., the month called by the Copts Mekhir, the sixth month of 
the Egyptian year. 

* 'These words ure added from the Papyrus of Nebseni. 

4 These words are added from the Papyrus of Ani, 


“O]JOUSLA OY} 07 Surps090¥ [[VHf 9} JO JUOMIISUBAIG [RIOUAS OY} IdIBI]D OXBUE OF ULI BAOGR 9q4 TOTF pazqruLo Waa] 
DAVY $4XO} OST INq ‘WWOUTAIWIS BATZBSU Ot] SI UIT AOTA PUL ‘TITY 0} pasBadap OT} JO SSaIPpPB oY} WSJ ST pos YORE BACT 
“T[REL OY} JO Ud OY 4B paywas oIv Sossoppos YVR OY) PUL ‘PRoy STY WO JVB JO TOYIBJ 91} SIAM SpOs O4-L4L0F aI. Jo TORY 


(‘TuasqeN jo suakdeg ay} WoIg) “ILYV]T TIAA azo TIvA AHL 


' INNA 


it 
al 


gaa! 


NNN 
RLUID ODA DREADS DS OER SD AN BS Wet ISS Lee aa aad aera adidas 


"axxo ‘deyd | 


Chap, cxxv. ] THE NEGATIVE CONFESSION 365 


The Negative Confession. 
[From the Papyrus of Nebseni (Brit. Mus. No. 9900, sheet 30). ] 


Vignette :! The 
Hall of double 
Maati, that is to 
say the Hall of the 
goddesses Isis and 
Nephthys who sym- 
bolize Right and 
Truth; herein are 
seated or stand 
forty-two gods, to 
each of whom the 
deceased must ad- 
dress a prescribed 
negative statement. 
At each end is one 
half of a folding 
door, one having 
the name of NEB- 
MAAvT - HERI - TEP - 
RETUI-F and the 
other of NEB-PEHTI- 
QESU - MENMENET.? 
On the centre of 
the roof, which has 
a cornice of uraei, 
typifying divinity, 
and feathers, sym- 
bolic of Maat, is a 


! The vignette here 
described is that of 
the Papyrus of Ani, 
sheet 31. 

? See above, p. 359, 


366 THE NEGATIVE CONFESSION — [Chap. exxv. 1 


seated deity,! painted bluish-green, with hands extended, the 
right over the Eye of Horus, and the left over a pool. At 
the end of the Hall are four small vignettes, in which are 
depicted :—l. The Maati goddesses, each seated upon a throne 
and holding a sceptre in her right hand, and the emblem of life 
in her left. 2. The deceased, arrayed in white, standing before 
the god Osiris with both hands raised in adoration, 3. A 
balance with the heart, symbolizing the conscience of the 
deceased, in one scale, and the feather, emblematic of Right 
and Truth, in the other. The god Anubis is testing the tongue 
of the balance, and close by stands the monster Am-met. 
4, Thoth, ibis-headed, seated upon a pylon-shaped pedestal, 
painting a large feather of Maat. In the Papyrus of Anhai the 
gods are seated in a double row; each has his characteristic 
head, and nearly all wear the feather of Maat. 


Twenty of the Judges of the Dead, (From the Papyrus of Anhai.) 


Text: The scribe Nebseni, triumphant, saith :— 

1. “ Hail, thon whose strides are long, who comest 
“forth from Annu (Heliopolis), I have not done iniquity. 

2. “Hail, thou who art embraced by flame, who 
‘“comest forth from Kher-aha,? I have not robbed with 
“ violence, 


' Tn the XVIIth Chapter, line 46 (see above, p. 97) this god is 
called Leh, i.e., ‘‘ Millions of years.” 
2 A city near Memphis. | 


Chap. cxxv.12] THE NEGATIVE CONFESSION ~ 367 


3. “Hail, thou divine Nose (Fenti), who comest 
“forth from Khemennu (Hermopolis), I have not done 
“ violence [to any man]. 

4. “ Hail, thou who eatest shades, who comest forth 
“from the place where the Nile riseth,’ I have not 
‘committed theft. 

5. “ Hail, Neha-hau,* who comest forth from Re-stau, 
“T have not slain man or woman. 

6. “Hail, thou double Lion-god, who comest forth 
“from heaven, I have not made light the bushel. 

7. “Hail, thou whose two eyes are like flint,’ who 
“comest forth from Sekhem (Letopolis), I have not 
“acted deceitfully. 

8. “Hail, thou Flame, who comest forth as [thou] 
“goest back, I have not purloined the things which 
“belong unto God. 

9. “ Hail, thou Crusher of bones, who comest forth 
“from Suten-henen (Heracleopolis), I have not uttered 
“ falsehood. 

10. “ Hail, thou who makest the flame to wax strong, 
“who comest forth from Het-ka-Ptah (Memphis), I have 
“not carried away food. 

11. ‘“ Hail, Qerti (i.e., the two sources of the Nile), 
“who come forth from Amentet, I have not uttered evil 
“words. 

12, “ Hail, thou whose teeth shine, who comest forth 


1 The Qerli or caverns out of which flowed the Nile were thought 
to be situated between Aswan and Philae, 
2 Variant, Neha-hra. 3 Variant, ‘‘like fire.” 


368 THE NEGATIVE CONFESSION  [Chap. exxv. 13 


“from Ta-she (i.e., the Fayyim), I have attacked no 
“man. 

13. “ Hail, thou who dost consume blood, who 
“comest forth from the house of slaughter, I have 
“not killed the beasts [which are the property of 
God]. 

14. ‘“ Hail, thou who dost consume the entrails, who 
“comest forth from the mdbet chamber, I have not 
“acted deceitfully. 

15. “ Hail, thou god of Right and Truth, who comest 
“forth from the city of double Maati, I have not laid 
“waste the lands which have been ploughed (?). 

16. “ Hail, thou who goest backwards, who comest 
“forth from the city of Bast (Bubastis), I have never 
“pried into matters [to make mischief]. 

17. “Hail, Aati, who comest forth from Annu 
(Heliopolis), I have not set my mouth in motion 
“laoainst any man]. 

18. “Hail, thou who art doubly evil, who comest 
“forth from the nome of Ati,! I have not given way 
“to wrath concerning myself without a cause, 

19. “ Hail, thou serpent Uamenti, who comest forth 
“from the house of slaughter, I have not defiled the 
“wife of a man. 

20. “ Hail, thou who lookest upon what is brought 
“to him, who comest forth from the Temple of Amsu, I 
‘have not committed any sin against purity. 


' T.e., the ninth nome of Lower Egypt, the capital of which was 
Per-Ausar or Busiris. 


Chaps, cxxv, 27] THE NEGATIVE CONFESSION 369 


Twenty-two of the Judges of the Dead, (From the Papyrus of Anhai.) 


21. “Hail, Chief of the divine Princes, who comest 
“forth from the city of Nehatu,' I have not struck fear 
“into any man]. 

22. “Hail, Khemi (i.e., Destroyer), who comest 
“forth from the Lake of Kaui (Khas ’?), I have not en- 
“croached upon [sacred times and seasons]. 

23. “Hail, thou who orderest speech, who comest 
“forth from Urit, I have not been a man of anger. 

24, “Hail, thou Child, who comest forth from the 
“Take of Heq-at,? I have not made myself deaf to the 
‘words of right and truth. 

25. “Hail, thou disposer of speech, who comest forth 
“from the city of Unes,* I have not stirred up strife. 

26. “Hail, Basti, who comest forth from the Secret 
“city, I have made no [man] to weep. 

27. “Hail, thou whose face is [turned] backwards, 
“who comest forth from the Dwelling, I have not 


1 The ‘‘city of the sycamore”; a name of a city of Upper 
Egypt. 

2 The thirteenth nome of Lower Egypt. 

3 The metropolis of the nineteenth nome of Upper Egypt. 


VOL, II. L 


370 THE NEGATIVE CONFESSION  [Chap. cxxv. 28 


“committed acts of impurity, neither have I lain with 
“men, 

28. “Hail, Leg of fire, who comest forth from 
“ Akhekhu, I have not eaten my heart.! 

29. Hail, Kenemti, who comest forth from [the city 
“of | Kenemet, I have abused [no man]. 

30. “Hail, thou who bringest thine offering, who 
‘comest forth from the city of Sau (Sais), I have not 
“acted with violence. 

31. “ Hail, thou lord of faces, who comest forth from 
“the city of Tchefet, I have not judged hastily. 

32. “Hail, thou who givest knowledge, who comest 
“forth from Unth, I have not >. ueeeeeee , and I 
“have not taken vengeance upon the god. 

33. “ Hail, thou lord of two horns, who comest forth 
“from Satiu, I have not multiplied [my] speech oyer- 
“much, 

34. ‘ Hail, Nefer-Tem, who comest forth from Het- 
“ka-Ptah (Memphis), I have not acted with deceit, and 
“T have not worked wickedness. 

35. “ Hail, Tem-Sep, who comest forth from Tattu, 
“T have not uttered curses [on the king]. 

36. “ Hail, thou whose heart doth labour, who comest 
“forth from the city of Tebti, I have not fouled (?) 
“water. 

87. “Hail, Ahi of the water, who comest forth from 
“Nu, I have not made haughty my voice. 


1 Le., ‘lost my temper and become angry.” 


Chap, cxxv. 42] THE NEGATIVE CONFESSION 371 


38. “ Hail, thou who givest commands to mankind, 
“who comest forth from [Sau (?)], I have not cursed 
“the god, 

39. “ Hail, Neheb-nefert, who comest forth from the 
‘“ Lake of Nefer (?), I have not behaved with insolence. 

40, “Hail, Neheb-kau, who comest forth from [thy] 
“city, I have not sought for distinctions. 

41. “Hail, thou whose head is holy, who comest 
“forth from [thy] habitation, I have not increased 
“my wealth, except with such things as are [justly] 
“mine own possessions. 

42. “Hail, thou who bringest thine own arm, who 
“comest forth from Aukert (underworld), I have not 
“thought scorn of the god who is in my city.” 


Address to the gods of the underworld. 
{From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 24). ] 


Vignette: The deceased standing with both hands raised in 
adoration. 


Text ; [THEN SHALL THE HEART WHICH IS RIGHTEOUS 
AND SINLESS SAY]! :— 

(1) The overseer of the house of the overseer of the 
seal, Nu, triumphant, saith :— 

“Homage to you, O ye gods who dwell in your Hall 

1 These words are added from Brit. Mus. No. 9905. Other papyri 
introduce the address with the words :—(1) ‘‘ To be said when [ the 
deceased] cometh forth victorious from the Hall of double Maati” ; 
2) ‘To be said when he cometh forth to the gods of the under- 


world”; (8) ‘The words which [are to be said] after the Hall of 
double Maati.” 


372 ADDRESS TO THE GODS [Chap, cxxv. 2 


“of double Maati, I, even I, know (2) you, and I know 
“your names. Let me not fall under your knives of 
“slaughter, and bring ye not forward my wickedness 
“unto the god in whose train ye are; (3) and let not 
“evil hap come upon me by your means. O declare 
“ye me right and true in the presence of Neb-er-tcher, 
“because I have done that which is right and true in 
“'Ta-mera (Kgypt). (4) I have not cursed God, and 
“let not evil hap come upon me through the king who 
“dwelleth in my day. Homage to you, O ye gods, who 
“dwell in your Hall of double Maati, (5) who are with- 
‘out evil in your bodies, and who live upon right and 
“truth, and who feed yourselves upon right and truth 
“in the presence of the god Horus, who (6) dwelleth in 
“his divine Disk: deliver ye me from the god Baba 
“who liveth upon the entrails of the mighty ones 
‘upon the day of the great judgment. (7) O grant 
‘ve that I may come to you, for I have not committed 
“faults, I have not sinned, I have not done evil, I have 
‘not borne false witness ; (8) therefore let nothing [evil] 
“be done unto me. I live upon right and truth, and I 
“feed upon right and truth. I have performed the 
“commandments of men [as well as| the things whereat 
“are gratified the gods, (9) I have made the god to be 
“at peace [with me by doing] that which is his will. 
“T have given bread to the hungry man, and water to 
‘the thirsty man, and apparel to the naked (10) man, 
“and a boat to the [shipwrecked] mariner. I have 
“made holy offerings to the gods, and sepulchral meals 


Chap. exxy, 18] ADDRESS TO THE GODS 373 


“to the khus. Be ye then my deliverers, (11) be ye 
“then my protectors, and make ye not accusation 
“against me in the presence of [the great god]. I 
“am clean of mouth and clean of hands; therefore 
“Jet it be said unto me by those who shall behold 
‘‘me, ‘Come in peace ; come in peace,’ (12) for I have 
“heard that mighty word which the spiritual bodies 
“(séhu)' spake unto the Cat (13) in the House of 
“Hapt-re. I have been made to give evidence before 
“the god Hra-f-ha-f (7.e., he whose face is behind him), 
“and he hath given a decision [concerning me]. I 
“have seen the things over which the persea tree 
“spreadeth [its branches] (14) within Re-stau. I am 
“he who hath offered up prayers to the gods and who 
“knoweth their persons. I have come and I have ad- 
“vanced to make the declaration of right and truth, 
“and to set the (15) balance upon what supporteth it 
“within the region of Aukert. Hail, thou who art 
‘exalted upon thy standard, thou lord of the Atefw 
“crown, whose name is proclaimed as ‘Lord of the 
‘winds,’ deliver thou me (16) from thy divine mes- 
“sengers who cause dire deeds to happen, and who 
‘cause calamities to come into being, and (17) who 
“are without coverings for their faces, for I have 
“done that which is right and true for the Lord of 
“right and truth. I have purified myself and my 
“breast (18) with libations, and my hinder parts 


1 The ordinary reading is, ‘‘ For I have heard the word which 
was spoken by the Ass with the Cat.” 


374 ADDRESS TO THE GODS (Chap, exxv, 19 


“with the things which make clean, and my inner 
“parts have been in the Pool of right and truth. 
“There is no single member of mine which lacketh 
“yioht and truth. (19) I have been purified in the 
“Pool of the south, and I have rested in the northern 
“city which is in the Field of the Grasshoppers, where- 
‘“‘in the divine sailors of Ra bathe at the (20) second 
“hour of the night and at the third hour of the day. 
“And the hearts of the gods are gratified (?) after they 
“have passed through it, whether it be by night, or 
“whether it be by day, and they say unto me, (21) 
“* Tet thyself come forward.’ And they say unto me, 
“Who, then, art thou?’ And they say unto me, 
“*What is thy name?’ ‘I am he who is equipped 
‘under the flowers [and I am| the dweller in his olive 
“ tree,’ (22) is my name. And they say unto me straight- 
“way, ‘Pass thou on’; and I passed on by the city to 
“the north of the olive tree. What, then, didst thou 
“see there? The leg and the thigh. What, then, (23) 
‘““didst thou say unto them? Let me see rejoicings 
“in those lands of the Fenkhu.'| And what did they 
‘“‘oive unto thee? A flame of (24) fire and a tablet (or 
“sceptre) of crystal. What, then, didst thou do there- 
“with? I buried them by the furrow of Manaat as 
“<thines for the night.? (25) What, then didst thou 
“find by the furrow of Maaat? <A sceptre of flint, the 
“name of which is ‘Giver of winds.’ What, then, 


1 A people who dwelt, probably, on the north-east frontier of 
Egypt, and who have been by some identified with the Phoenicians. 


Chap, cxxy. 30] ADDRESS TO THE GODS BS 


“ didst thou do to the flame of fire and the (26) tablet 
“(or sceptre) of crystal after thou hadst buried them? 
“T uttered words over them in the furrow, [and I dug 
“them out therefrom];! I extinguished the fire, and I 
“broke the tablet (or sceptre), and I created (27) a 
“pool of water. ‘Come, then,’ [they say,] ‘and enter 
“in through the door of this Hall of double Maati, for 
“thou knowest us.’ ” 

“*We will not let thee enter in through us,’ say the 
“bolts of (28) this door, ‘unless thou tellest [us] our 
“names’; ‘Tongue {of the Balance] of the place of 
“vioht and truth’ is your name. ‘I will not let thee 
“enter in by me,’ saith the [right] lintel (29) of this 
“door, ‘unless thou tellest [me] my name’; Balance of 
“the support of right and truth’ is thy name. ‘I will 
“not let thee enter in by me,’ saith the [left] lintel of 
“this door, (30) ‘unless thou tellest [me] my name 
“{* Balance of wine’ is thy name, ‘I will not let thee 
“pass over me,’ saith the threshold of this door, ‘ unless 
“thou tellest [me] my name’; ‘Ox of the god Seb’ is 
“thy name. ‘I will not open unto thee,’ saith the 
“fastening of this door, ‘unless thou tellest [me] my 
“name’; ‘Flesh of his mother’ is thy name. ‘I will 
“not open unto thee,’ saith the socket of the fastening 
“of this door, ‘unless thou tellest me my name’; |! 
“*Tjiving eye of the god Sebek, the lord of Bakhau,’ 
“is thy name. ‘I will not open unto thee [and I will 
“not let thee enter in by me,’ saith the guardian of the 


| These words are added from the Papyrus of Nebseni, 


376 ADDRESS TO THE GODS [Chap, exxv. 3 


“leaf of| this door, ‘unless (81) thou tellest [me] my 
“name’; ‘Elbow of the god Shu when he placeth him- 
“self to protect Osiris’ is thy name. ‘We will not let 
“thee enter in by us,’ say the posts of this door, ‘ unless 
“thou tellest us our names’; (32) ‘Children of the 
“uraei-goddesses’ is your name.’ ‘Thou knowest us,’ 
“Ithey say], (83) ‘ pass on, therefore, by us.’ 

““<«T will not let thee tread upon me,’ saith the floor 
‘of (34) this Hall of double Maati, ‘because I am silent 
“and Iam holy, and because I do not know the names] 
“of thy two feet wherewith thou wouldst walk (35) 
“upon me; therefore tell them to me.’ ‘ Traveller (?) 
‘of the god Khas’ is the name of my right foot, and 
“< Staff of the goddess Hathor’ is the name of my left 
“foot.” (36) ‘Thou knowest me,’ [it saith], ‘pass on 
“therefore over me.’” 

“«T will not make mention of thee,’ saith the guardian 
‘of the door of this Hall of double Maati, ‘ unless thou 
“tellest [me] my name’; ‘])iscerner of (37) hearts and 
“searcher of the reins’ is thy name. ‘Now will I make 
‘mention of thee [to the god]. But who is the god 
“that dwelleth in his hour? Speak thou it’ (7.e., his 
“name). Maau-Taui (i.c., he who keepeth the record 
‘of the two lands) [is his name]. ‘Who then is (38) 
“ Maau-Taui?’ He is Thoth, ‘Come,’ saith Thoth, 
“«But why hast thou come?’ I have come, and I press 

1 The Papyrus of Nu continues, ‘‘I will not open unto thee and 
I will not let thee pass by me,’ saith the Guardian of this door, 


‘unless (33) thou tellest [me] my name’; ‘Ox of Seb’ is thy 
name.” See above, 1. 30, 


Chap. exxv. 51 | ADDRESS TO THE GODS SAF! 


“forward that I may be mentioned. What now (39) is 
“thy condition? J, even I, am purified from evil 
“things, and I am protected from the baleful deeds 
“of those who live in (40) their days; and I am not 
“among them. ‘Now will I make mention of thee [to 
“the god]! ‘[Tell me now], who is he* whose (44) 
“heaven is of fire, whose walls [are surmounted by] 
“living uraei, and the floor of whose house is a stream 
“of water? Who is he, I say?’ It is (45) Osiris. 
““¢ Come forward, then: verily thou shalt be mentioned 
“fio him]. Thy cakes [shall come] from the Eye of 
“Ra, and thine ale [shall come] from (46) the Eye of 
“Ra, and the sepulchral meals which shall be brought 
‘to thee upon earth [shall come] from the Eye of 
“Ra. This hath been decreed for the Osiris the over- 
“seer of the house of the overseer of the seal, Nu, 
“triumphant.’ ” 

RUBRIC: (47) The making of the representation 
of what shall happen in this Hall of double Maati. 
This chapter shall be said [by the deceased] after he hath 
been cleansed and purified, and when he is arrayed in apparel, 
(48) and is shod with white leather sandals, and his eyes have 
been painted with antimony, and [his body] hath been anointed 
with unguent of anti, and when he offereth oxen, and feathered 
fowl, and incense, and cakes, and ale, and (49) garden herbs, 
And, behold, thou shalt draw a representation of this in colour 
upon a new tile moulded from (50) earth upon which neither a 
pig nor other animals have trodden, And if [thou] doest this 


book upon it [in writing, the deceased] shall flourish, and his 
children (51) shall flourish, and [his name] shall never fall into 


1 Here the Papyrus repeats a passage given above. 
? The words semd-kud are superfluous. 


378 ADDRESS TO THE GODS [Chap. exxv. 52 


oblivion, and he shall be as one who filleth (i.¢., satisfieth) the 
heart of the king and of his princes. And bread, and cakes, 
and sweetmeats, (52) and wine, and pieces of flesh shall be 
given unto him upon the altar of the great god; and he shall 
not be turned back at any door in Amentet, and he shall be 
(53) brought in along with the kings of Upper and Lower 
Egypt, and he shall be in the train of Osiris,! continually and 
regularly for ever.” 


CHAPTER CXXVI. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 24).] 


Vignette: A lake of fire, at each corner of which is seated a 
dog-headed ape. 


1 After ‘‘ Osiris”? a Paris papyrus adds, ‘“‘ He shall come forth in 
whatsoever form he is pleased to appear as a living sonl for ever 
and ever.” 

In the Papyrus of Ani (sheet 33) this Rubrie comes after 
cen XLII., and is written below the vignette of Chapter 
CXXVI. 


Chap, cxxvi. 12] ADDRESS TO THE FOUR APES 379 


Text :' (1) The overseer of the house of the overseer 
of the seal, Nu, triumphant, the son of the overseer of 
the house of the overseer of the seal, Amen-hetep, 
triumphant, saith :— (2) 


“Hail, ye four apes who sit in the bows of the boat 
“of (3) Ra, who convey right and truth to Neb-er-tcher, 
“who sit in judgment (4) on my misery and on my 
“streneth, who make the gods to rest contented by 
“means of the flame of (5) your mouths, who offer holy 
“offerings to the gods and sepulchral meals to the 
“Khus, (6) who live upon right and truth, and who 
“feed upon (7) right and truth of heart, who are 
“without deceit and fraud, and to whom wickedness 
“is an abomination, (8) do ye away with my evil 
“deeds, and put ye away my sin [which deserved 
“stripes upon earth, and destroy ye any evil whatso- 
“ever that belongeth unto me],’ and let there be no 
“obstacle whatsoever on my part (9) towards you. O 
“orant ye that I may make my way through the under- 
“world (mmehet), let me enter into Re-stau, let me 
“pass through (10) the hidden pylons of Amentet. O 
“orant that there may be given to me cakes, (11) and 
“ale, and sweetmeats (7), even as [they are given] to 
“the living khus, and grant that I may enter in (12) 
“and come forth from Re-stau.” 

“|The four apes make answer, saying], Come, then, 


1 This Chapter has no title either in the Theban or in the Saite 
Recension. 
2 The words in brackets are added from Brit. Mus. No. 9913. 


380 ADDRESS TO THE FOUR APES [Chap, exxvi. 13 


‘‘for we have done away with thy wickedness, and we 
“have put away thy sin, along with the [sin deserving 
‘‘of] stripes which thou [didst commit] upon earth, and 
‘‘we have destroyed [all] the (13) evil which belonged 
“to thee upon the earth. Enter, therefore, into Re- 
“stau, and pass thou through the hidden pylons of 
«“ Amentet, and there shall be given unto thee cakes, 
“ (14) and ale, and sweetmeats (?), and thou shalt come 
“forth and thou shalt enter in at thy desire, even as 
“do those khus who are favoured [of the god], and 
“thou shalt be proclaimed (or called) each day in the 
“ horizon.” 


CHAPTER CXXVIIa. 


[From the Tomb of Rameses IV. (see Naville, op. cit., Bd. I. 
Bl. 141; Lefébure, Tombeaw de Ramsés IV,, Plate 18). ] 


Vignette : This version of the CXXVIIth Chapter has not 
yet been found in the papyri containing the Theban Recension. 
In the Saite Recension (Lepsius, op. ett., Bl. 51) the deceased 
stands, with both hands raised in adoration, before a table of 
offerings placed in the presence of six gods, three standing 


Ch, exxviia.5] HYMN TO THE GODS OF THE QERTI 381 


upright and three seated, each of whom holds in his hands a 

flail and a sceptre. The first god has the head of a bull, the 

second is jackal-headed, the third is snake-headed, the fourth 

is human-headed, the fifth is bull-headed, and the sixth is 

human-headed. The last three have feathers, emblematic of 
right and truth, on their heads. 


Text: (1) Tue Book of THE PRAISE OF THE GODS 
OF THE QERTI' WHICH A MAN SHALL RECITE WHEN 
HE COMETH FORTH BEFORE THEM TO ENTER IN TO 
SEE THE GOD IN THE GREAT TEMPLE OF THE UNDER- 
worup. And he shall say :— 

“Homage to you, O ye gods of the Qerti, (2) ye 
“divine dwellers in Amentet! Homage to you, O ye 
“ouardians of the doors of the underworld, who keep 
“ward over the god, who bear and proclaim [the names 
“of those who come] into the presence of the god (3) 
“ Osiris, and who hold yourselves ready, and who praise 
“Thim], and who destroy the Enemies of Ra. O send 
“ye forth your light and scatter ye the darkness [which 
“is about] you, and behold ye the holy and divine (4) 
“Mighty One, O ye\who live even as he liveth, and 
“call ye upon him that dwelleth within his divine 


“Disk. Lead ye the King of the North and of the 
“ South, (Usr- 
“Sun, (Ra-meses-meri-Amen-Ra-heq-Maat J, through 


“your doors, may his divine soul enter into your hidden 
“places, (5) [for] he is one among you, and he hath 


Maat-Ra-setep-en-Amen }, the son of the 


1 T.e., districts or divisions of the underworld. 


382 HYMN TO THE GODS OF THE QERTI (Ch. exxviia. 6 


“shot forth calamities upon the serpent fiend Apep, 
“and he hath beaten down the obstacles [which Apep 
“set up]in Amentet. Thy word hath prevailed mightily 
“over thine enemies, O ereat God, who livest in thy 
“divine Disk; thy word hath (6) prevailed mightily 
“over thine enemies, O Osiris, Governor of Amentet; 
“thy word hath prevailed mightily over thine enemies 
“in heaven and in earth, O thou King of the North and 


“of the South, (Usr-Maat-Ra-setep-en-Amen J, the son 


“of the Sun, ( Ra-meses-meri-Amen-Ra-heq-Maat J, and 
“over the sovereign princes of every god and of every 
“ voddess, (7) O Osiris, Governor of Amentet ; he hath 
“uttered words in the presence [of the god in] the 
“valley of the dead, and he hath gained the mastery 
“over the mighty sovereign princes. Hail, ye door- 
“keepers (?), hail, ye doorkeepers, who guard your 
‘“oates, who punish (8) souls, who devour the bodies 
‘of the dead, who advance over them at their examina- 
‘‘tion in the places of destruction, who give right and 
“truth to the soul and to the divine ‘hu, the beneficent 
“one, (9) the mighty one, whose throne is holy in Akert, 
“who is endowed with soul like Ra and who is praised 
“like Osiris, lead ye along the King of the North and 
“of the South, (Usr-Maat-Ra-setep-en-Amen }, the son 


“of the Sun, (a-moses-meri-Amen-Ra-heq-Maat J, un- 
“bolt ye for him (10) the doors, and open [ye] the place 
“of his Qerti for him. Behold, make ye his word to 


Ch. exxviia.15] HYMN TO THE GODS OF THE QERTI 383 


“triumph over his enemies, and indeed Jet meat-offer- 
“ings and drink-offerings be made unto him by the god 
“of the double door, and let him (11) put on the 
“nemmes crown of him that dwelleth in the great 
“and hidden shrine. Behold the image of Heru- 
“\khuti (Harmachis), who is doubly true, and who is 
“the divine Soul and the divine and (12) perfect Khu; 
“he hath prevailed with his hands. The two great 
“and mighty gods cry out to the King of the North 


“and South (Usr-Maat-Ra-setep-on-Amen J, the son 
“of the Sun, (Ra-meses-meri-Amen-Ra-heq-Maat J, they 


“rejoice in him, they sing praises to (13) him, [and 
“clap| their hands, they accord him their protec- 
“tion, and he liveth. The King of the North and 
“South (Usr-Maat-Ra-setep-en-Amen J, the son of 


“the Sun, (Ra-meses-meri-Amen-Ra-heq-Maat ), riseth 
“like a living soul in heaven. He hath been com- 
“manded to (14) make his transformations, he hath 
“made himself victorious before the divine sovereign 
‘chiefs, and he hath made his way through the 
‘“oates of heaven, and of earth, and of the under- 
“world, even as hath Ra. The King of the North 


“and South, (Usr-Maat-Ra-setep-en-Amen J, the son 
“of the Sun, (Ra-meses-meri-Amen-Ra-heq-Maat J, (15) 


‘saith, ‘Open unto me the gate[s] of heaven, and of 
“earth, and of the underworld, for I am the divine soul 


384 ADDRESS TO THE SOVEREIGN CHIEFS [Ch.exxviia. 16 


“of Osiris and I rest in him, and let me pass through 
“their halls. Let [the gods] sing praises unto me 
‘“‘Twhen]| they see (16) me; let me enter and let favour 
‘be shown unto me; let me come forth and let me be 
“beloved; and let me go forward, for no defect or fail- 


29) 


“ing hath been found clinging unto me. 


CHAPTER CXXVIIz. 
{From the Papyrus of Ptah-mes (Naville, op. cit., Bd. I. Bl. 142). ] 


Vignette : Sixteen gods in four groups, each containing two 
pairs; before each group is a table of offerings. 


Text: (1) A CHAPTER TO BE RECITED ON COMING 
BEFORE THE DIVINE SOVEREIGN CHIEFS OF OSIRIS TO 
OFFER PRAISE UNTO THE GODS WHO ARE THE GUIDES 
OF THE UNDERWORLD. Osiris (2) the chief scribe and 
draughtsman, Ptah-mes, triumphant, saith :— 

“ Homage to you, O ye gods who dwell in the Qerti,' 
“ye gods who dwell in Amentet, (3) who keep ward 
“over the gates of the underworld and are the guardians 
“thereof |, who bear and proclaim [the names of those 
“who come] into the (4) presence of Osiris, who praise 
“him and who destroy the enemies of Ra. O send 
“forth your light and (5) scatter ye the darkness 


1 [.e., divisions of the underworld. 


Ch, cxxvil.s.15] ADDRESS TO THE SOVEREIGN CHIEFS 385 


“Twhich is about] you, and look upon the face of 
“Osiris, O ye who live even as he liveth, and praise 
“‘Tye| him (6) that dwelleth in his Disk, and lead [ye] 
““me away from your calamities. Let me come forth 
“and let me enter in through (7) your secret places, for 
“Tam a mighty prince among you, for I have done 
“away with evil there, and I have beaten down the (8) 
“obstacles (?) [which have been set up] in Amentet. 
“Thou hast been victorious over thine enemies, O thou 
“that dwellest in thy Disk; thou hast been victorious 
“over thine (9) enemies, O Thoth, who producest (?) 
“statutes ; thou hast been victorious over thine enemies, 
“O Osiris, (10) the chief scribe and draughtsman, Ptah- 
“mes, triumphant; thou hast been triumphant over 
“thine enemies, O Osiris, thou Governor of Amentet, 
“in heaven and upon earth in the presence of the (11) 
“divine sovereign chiefs of every god and of every god- 
“dess; and the food (?) of Osiris, the Governor of 
“ Amentet, is in the presence of the god whose name 
“is hidden before (12) the great divine sovereign chiefs. 
“ Hail, ye guardians of the doors, ye [gods] who keep 
“ward over their habitations (?), who keep the reckon- 
“ing, and who commit [souls] to (13) destruction, who 
“orant right and truth to the divine soul which is 
“stablished, who are without evil in the abode of 
“ A kert, (14) who are endowed with soul even as is 
Se Masaud WhO'ATS ... ss. as is Osiris, guide ye 
“Osiris the chief scribe, the draughtsman, (15) Ptah- 
“mes, triumphant, open ye unto him the gates of the 
VOL. Il. M 


386 ADDRESS TO THE SOVEREIGN CHIEFS [Ch. cxxvii.s.x6 


“underworld, and the uppermost part of his estate and 
“his Qert. (16) Behold, make [ye him] to be victorious 
‘over his enemies, provide [ye him] with the offerings 
“of the god of the underworld, make noble the divine 
“being who dwelleth in the nemmes (17) crown, the 
“Jord of the knowledge of Akert. Behold, stablish 
.... this soul in right and truth, (18) [and let it 
“become]| a perfect soul that hath gained the mastery 
“with its two hands. The great and mighty gods cry 
“out, ‘He hath gotten the victory, (19) and they 
“yejoice in him, and they ascribe praise unto him 
‘with their hands, and they turn unto him their 
“faces. (20) The living one is triumphant, and is 
‘‘even like a living soul dwelling in heaven, and he 
“hath been ordered to perform [his] transformations. 
‘“Qsiris (21) triumphed over his enemies, and Osiris, 
“the chief scribe and draughtsman, Ptah-mes, trium- 
‘‘phant, hath gained the victory (22) over his enemies 
“in the presence of the great divine sovereign chiefs 
‘‘who dwell in heaven, and in the presence of the great 
‘divine sovereign chiefs who dwell upon the earth.” 


Chap. exxviii, 2] HYMN TO OSIRIS 387 


CHAPTER CXXVIII. 


[From Lepsius, Todtenbuch, Bl. 51.] 


Vignette : The deceased standing before a table of offerings, 
with both hands raised in adoration, in the presence of the 
gods Osiris, Isis, Horus the son of Isis, and Nephthys. 


Text: A Hymn or pRAIseE To Osiris. (1) The 
Osiris, Auf-ankh, triumphant, saith :— 


“Homage to thee, O Osiris Un-nefer, triumphant, 
“thou son of Nut, thou first-born son of Seb, thou 
“mighty one who comest forth from Nut, thou King 
“in the city of Nifu-ur,! thou Governor of Amentet, 
“thou lord (2) of Abtu (Abydos), thou lord of souls, 
“thou mighty one of strength, thou lord of the atef 
“crown in Suten-henen, thou lord of the divine form 
“in the city of Nifu-ur, thou lord of the tomb, thou 
“mighty one of souls in Tattu, thou lord of [sepulchral | 


1 A name of the city of Abydos. 


388 HYMN TO OSIRIS | Chap, cxxviii. 3 


“offerings, thou whose festivals are many in Tattu. (3) 
“The god Horus exalteth his father in every place (or 
“shrine), and he uniteth [himself] unto the goddess 
“Tsis and unto her sister Nephthys; and the god 
“Thoth reciteth for him the mighty glorifymgs which 
“are within him, [and which] come forth from his 
“mouth, and the heart of Horus is stronger than that 
‘of all the gods. (4) Rise up, then, O Horus, thou son 
“of Isis, and avenge thy father Osiris. Hail, O Osiris, 
‘““T have come unto thee; I am Horus and I have 
“avenged thee, and I feed this day upon the sepulchral 
“meals of oxen, and feathered fowl, and upon all the 
“beautiful things [offered] unto Osiris. Rise up, then, 
“OQ Osiris, (5) for I have struck down for thee all thine 
“enemies, and I have taken vengeance upon them for 
“thee. I am Horus upon this beautiful day of thy 
“fair rising in thy Soul which exalteth thee along with 
“itself on this day before thy divine sovereign princes. 
“ Hail, O Osiris, (6) thy ka hath come unto thee and 
“vests with thee, and thou restest therein in thy name 
“of Ka-Hetep. It maketh thee glorious in thy name of 
“ Khu, and it maketh me like unto the Morning Star 
“in thy name of Pehu, and it openeth for thee (7) the 
“ways in thy name of Ap-uat. Hail, O Osiris, I have 
“come unto thee and I have set thine enemies under 
“thee in every place, and thou art triumphant in 
“the presence of the company of the gods and of the 
“divine sovereign chiefs. Hail, O Osiris, thou hast 
“received thy sceptre and (8) the place whereon thou 


Chap. exxviii. 9] HYMN TO OSIRIS 389 


“art to rest, and thy steps are under thee. Thou 
“bringest food to the gods, and thou bringest sepul- 
“chral meals unto those who dwell in their tombs. 
“Thou hast given thy might unto the gods and thou 
“hast created the Great God; thou hast thy existence 
“with them in their spiritual bodies, thou gatherest 
“thyself unto (9) all the gods, and thou hearest the 
“word of right and truth on the day when offerings te 
“this god are ordered on the festivals of Uka.” 


CHAPTER CXXIX. 


COTTOTTT TTT TTT ee 


Vignette : This Chapter is without a vignette in the Theban 
Recension; in the Turin Papyrus we find the deceased poling 
along a boat wherein are Ra and the Bennu bird, and in front of 
the boat stand a table of offerings, the god Osiris, and the Tet, 


Text; See Chapter C. 


390 OF PERFECTING THE SPIRIT  [Chap. cxxx. 7 


CHAPTER CXXX. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 17). ] 


Vignette : The deceased standing between the two boats of 

the sun. In the Saite Recension (see Lepsius, op, ezt., Bl. 52) 

the deceased is seen standing in the stern of a boat behind Ra 
and two other gods. 


Text: (1) ANoTHER CHAPTER OF MAKING PERFECT 
THE KHU, WHICH IS [TO BE RECITED ON| THE BIRTH- 
DAY OF OSIRIS, AND OF MAKING TO LIVE THE SOUL 
FOR EVER.! (2) The overseer of the house of the 
overseer of the seal, Nu, triumphant, saith :— 


“The heavens are opened, the earth is opened, the 
“West is opened, the Kast is opened, the southern half 
‘‘of heaven is opened, the northern half of heaven is 
‘opened, the doors are opened, and the (8) gates are 
“thrown wide open to Ra [as] he cometh forth from 

‘ Variant, ‘‘'The Book of making the soul to live for ever. [To 


be recited] on the day of embarking in the boat of Ra to pass over 
to the chiefs of flame.” See Nayille, op. cit., Bd. IL. p. 838, 


Chap. exxx.10] OF PERFECTING THE SPIRIT 391 


“the horizon. The Sektet boat openeth for him the 
“double doors and the Mdfet boat bursteth open [for 
“him]| the gates; he breatheth, and the god (4) Shu 
“‘fcometh into being], and he createth the goddess Tef- 
“nut. 'Those who are in the following of Osiris follow 
“in his train, and the overseer of the house of the 
“overseer of the seal, Nu, triumphant, (5) followeth 
“on in the train of Ra. He taketh his iron weapon 
“and he forceth open the shrine even as doth Horus, 
“and pressing onwards he advanceth unto the hidden 
“things of his habitations with the libations of (6) his 
“divine shrine ; the messenger of the god that loveth 
“him. The Osiris Nu, the overseer of the house of 
“the overseer of the seal, triumphant, bringeth forth 
“the right and the truth, and he maketh to advance 
“the going forward ! of (7) Osiris. The Osiris Nu, the 
“overseer of the house of the overseer of the seal, 
“triumphant, taketh in [his hand[s] the cordage and 
“he bindeth fast the shrine. Storms are the things 
“which he abominateth. (8) Let no water-flood be 
“nigh unto him, let not the Osiris Nu, the overseer 
“of the house of the overseer of the seal, trium- 
“phant, be repulsed before Ra, and let him not be 
“made to turn back; for, behold, the Eye is in his 
“two hands. (9) Let not the Osiris Nu, the overseer 
“of the house of the overseer of the seal, triumphant, 
“walk in the valley of darkness, let him not enter into 
“ (10) the Lake of those who are evil, and let him have 


! Or, “images,” 


392 OF PERFECTING THE SPIRIT  [Chap. exxx, i1 


“no existence among the damned, even for a moment. 
“Let not the Osiris Nu fall headlong (11) among those 
‘who would lead him captive, and let not [his] soul go 
“in among them. Let his divine face take possession 
“of the place behind the block, the block of the god 
“ Septu.” 

“Hymns of praise be unto you, O ye divine beings of 
“the Thigh, (12) the knives of God [work] in secret, 
“and the two arms and hands of God cause the light 
“to shine; it is doubly pleasant unto him to lead the 
(18) old unto him along with the young at his season. 
“Now, behold, the god Thoth dwelleth within his 
“hidden places, and he performeth the ceremonies of 
‘]ibation (14) unto the god who reckoneth millions of 
‘“vears, and he maketh a way through the firmament, 
“and he doeth away with storms and whirlwinds from 
“his stronghold, and the Osiris Nu, the overseer 
‘of the house of the overseer of the seal, triumphant, 
‘arriveth in the places of his (15) habitations. [O ye 
“divine beings of the Thigh], do ye away with his 
“sorrow, and his suffering, and his pain, and may the 
‘sorrow of the Osiris [Nu] be altogether put away. Let 
“the Osiris Nu, the overseer of the house of the over- 
“seer of the seal, triumphant, gratify (16) Ra, let him 
“make a way into the horizon of Ra, let his boat be 
“made ready for him, let him sail on happily, and let 
“Thoth put light into [his] heart; (17) then shall the 
“Osiris Nu, triumphant, praise and glorify Ra, and Ra 
“shall hearken unto his words, and he shall beat down 


Chap, exxx.25] OF PERFECTING THE SPIRIT 393 


“the obstacles which come from his enemies. I have 
“not been (18) shipwrecked, I have. not been turned 
“back in the horizon, for I am Ra-Osiris, and the 
“Osiris Nu, the overseer of the house of the overseer 
“of the seal, shall not be shipwrecked (19) in the 
“Great Boat. Behold him whose face is in the god 
“of the Thigh, because the name of Ra is in the body 
“of the Osiris Nu, the overseer of the house of the 
“overseer of the seal, and his honour is in his mouth; 
(20) he shall speak unto Ra, and Ra shall hearken 
“unto his words.” 

“Hymns of praise unto thee, O Ra, in the horizon, 
“and homage unto thee, O thou that purifiest with 
“light (21) the denizens of heaven, O thou who hast 
“sovereign power over heaven at that supreme moment 
“when the paddles of thine enemies move with thee! 
“The Osiris Nu, the overseer of the house of the overseer 
“of the seal, triumphant, (22) cometh with the ordering 
“of right and truth, for there is an iron firmament in 
‘“ Amentet which the fiend Apep hath broken through 
‘with his storms before the double Lion-god, (23) and 
“this will the Osiris Nu set in order; O hearken ye, 
“ye who dwell upon the top of the throne of majesty. 
“The Osiris Nu shall come in among thy divine sove- 
“reion chiefs, (24) and Ra shall deliver him from Apep 
“each day so that he may not come nigh unto him, 
“and he shall make himself vigilant. The Osiris Nu 
“shall have power over the things which are written, 
“he shall receive (25) sepulchral meals, and the god 


. 
3904 OF PERFECTING THE SPIRIT  ([Chap. cxxx, 26 


“Thoth shall provide him with the things which should 
“be prepared for him. The Osiris Nu maketh right 
“and truth to go round about the bows in the Great 
“Boat, (26) and hath triumph among the divine 
“sovereign chiefs, and he establisheth [it] for millions 
‘‘of years. The divine chiefs guide him and give unto 
“him a passage in the boat (27) with joy and gladness ; 
“the first ones among the company of the sailors of Ra 
“are behind him, and he is happy. Right and truth 
“are exalted, and they have come unto their divine 
“lord, and praises have been ascribed unto (28) the 
“ood Neb-er-tcher. The Osiris Nu, the overseer of 
“the house of the overseer of the seal, triumphant, 
“hath taken in his hands the weapon and he hath 
‘““made his way through heaven therewith ; the denizens 
“thereof have ascribed praises unto him as [unto] a 
“divine being who standeth up (29) and never sinketh 
“to rest. The god Ra exalteth him by reason of what 
“he hath done, and he causeth him to make of none 
“effect the whirlwind and the storm; he looketh (30) 
“upon his splendours, and he stablisheth his oars, and 
“the boat saileth round about in heaven, rising like 
“the sun in the darkness. Thoth, the mighty one, 
“Jeadeth the Osiris Nu (81) within his eye, and he 
“sitteth [upon his] thigh[s] in the mighty boat of 
“ Khepera; he cometh into being, and the things which 
“he saith come to pass. (32) The Osiris Nu ad- 
“vanceth, and he journeyeth round about heaven unto 
‘“Amentet, the fiery deities stand up before him, and 


Chap. cxxx. 41] OF PERFECTING THE SPIRIT : 395 


“the god Shu rejoiceth exceedingly, and they take in 
“their hands the bows [of the boat] of Ra along with 
‘his divine mariners. (33) Ra goeth round about and 
“he looketh upon Osiris. The Ostris Nu is at peace, 
“the Osiris Nu is at peace. He hath not been driven 
“back, the flame of thy moment (34) hath not been 
“taken away from him, [O Ra,] the whirlwind and 
“storm of thy mouth have not come forth against 
“him, he hath not journeyed upon the path of the 
‘“‘crocodile—for he abominateth (35) the crocodile— 
“and it hath not drawn nigh unto him. The Osiris 
‘Nu embarketh in thy boat, O Ra, (86) he is furnished 
“with thy throne, and he receiveth thy spiritual form. 
“The Osiris Nu travelleth over the paths of Ra at 
“daybreak to drive back the fiend Nebt; [he] cometh 
“(37) upon the flame of .thy boat, [O Ra,] upon 
“that mighty Thigh. The Osiris Nu knoweth it, 
“and he attaimeth unto thy boat, (88) and behold 
“he [sitteth] therein; and he maketh sepulchral 
“ offerings.” 


RUBRIC: [This chapter shall be] recited over a boat of the 
god Ra which hath been painted (39) in colours in a pure place. 
And behold thou shalt place a figure of the deceased in the 
bows thereof, and thou shalt paint a Sektet boat upon the right 
side thereof, and an Atet boat upon the left side thereof, and 
there shall be made (40) unto them offerings of bread, and 
cakes, and wine, and oil, and every kind of fair offering upon 
the birthday of Osiris. If these ceremonies be performed his 
soul shall have existence, and shall live for ever, and shall not 
die (41) a second time. 


396 RUBRIC [Chap. cxxx. 


The following is from the Rubric to this Chapter in 
the Saite Recension (see Lepsius, op. cit., Bl. 53) :— 

“(He shall know] the hidden things of the under- 
“world, he shall penetrate the hidden things in Neter- 
“khertet (the underworld).” 

‘(This Chapter] was found in the large hall (?) of the 
“Temple under the reign of His Majesty Semti (Eesepti), 
“triumphant, and it was found in the cavern of the 
“mountain which Horus made for his father Osiris 
‘“Un-nefer, triumphant. Now since Ra looketh upon 
“this deceased in his own flesh, he shall look upon him 
‘as the company of the gods. The fear of him shall 
‘be great, and the awe of him shall be mighty in the 
“heart of men, and gods, and Khus, and the damned. 
‘“‘He shall be with his soul and shall live for ever; he 
“shall not die a second time in the underworld; and 
‘on the day of weighing of words no evil hap shall 
“befall him. He shall be triumphant over his enemies, 
“and his sepulchral meals shall be upon the altar of 
“Ra in the course of each day, day by day.” 


Chap. cxxxi.5] OF LIVING NIGH UNTO RA 307 


CHAPTER CXXXI. 
[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheets 17 and 18). ] 


Vignette: This Chapter is without vignette, both in the 
Papyrus of Nu and in the Saite Recension (see Lepsius, op. cit., 
Bl, 54). 


Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF HAVING EXISTENCE 
NIGH UNTO Ra.! The overseer of the house of the 
overseer of the seal, Nu, triumphant, saith :— 


“Tam that god Ra who shineth in the night. Lvery 
“ (2) being who followeth in his train shall have life in 
“the following of the god Thoth, and he shall give 
“unto him the risings of Horus in the darkness. The 
“heart of Osiris Nu, the overseer of the house of the 
“overseer of the seal, triumphant, is glad (3) because 
“he is one of those beings, and his enemies have been 
“destroyed by the divine princes. I am a follower of 
“Ra, and [I have] received his iron weapon. (4) I 
“have come unto thee, O my father Ra, and I have 
“advanced to the god Shu. I have cried unto the 
“mighty goddess, I have equipped the god Hu, (5) and 
“T alone have removed the Nebt god from the path of 
“Ra. I am a Khu, and I have come to the divine 
“prince at the bounds of the horizon, I have met 


1 Or, ‘* The Chapter of making the way into heaven nigh unto 
Ra.” 


398 OF LIVING NIGH UNTO RA _ [Chap. exxxi. 6 


(6) and I have received the mighty goddess. I have 
“raised up thy soul in the following of thy strength, 
“and my soul [liveth] through thy victory and thy 
“mighty power; it is I who give commands (7) in 
“speech to Ra in heaven. Homage to thee, O great 
“ood in the east of heaven, let me embark in thy boat, 
“QO Ra, let me open myself out in the form of a divine 
“hawk, (8) let me give my commands in words, let me 
“do battle in my Sekhem (?), let me be master under 
“my vine. Let me embark in thy boat, O Ra, in 
“peace, (9) and let me sail in peace to the beautiful 
“Amentet. Let the god Tem speak unto me, [saying], 
“*Wouldst [thou] enter therem?’ The lady, the 
“goddess Mehen, is a million of years, yea, two million 
“years in (10) duration, and dwelleth in the house of 
‘“Urt and Nif-urt [and in] the Lake of a million years ; 
“the whole company of the gods move about among 
“those who are at the side of him who is the lord of 
“divisions of places (?). And I say, ‘On every road 
“and among (11) these millions of years is Ra the lord, 
“and his path is in the fire; and they go round about 
“behind him, and they go round about behind him.” 


Chap, cxxxii. | OF REVISITING THE EARTH 399 


CHAPTER CXXXII. 


[From the Papyrus of Ani (Brit. Mus. No. 10,470, sheet 18)._| 


Vignette : The deceased standing before a house and holding 

a long staff in his hand. In the Brocklehurst papyrus the. soul 

of the deceased, in the form of a human-headed bird, is seen 

hovering over a house by the side of which is a tree (see 
Naville, op. cit., Bd. I. Bl. 145). 

Text: (1) THE CHAPTER OF CAUSING A MAN TO 
COME BACK TO SEE HIS HOUSE UPON EARTH.’ The 
Osiris Ani saith :— 

“T am the Lion-god(2) coming forth with extended 
“strides. I have shot arrows and I have wounded the 
“prey; I have shot arrows and I have wounded the 
“prey. Iam the (3) Eye of Horus, and I pass through 
“the Hye of Horus at this season. I have arrived at 
“the furrows; let the Osiris Ani advance in peace.” * 

1 In the Saite Recension (see Lepsius, op. cit., Bl. 54) the house 
is said to be ‘tin the underworld.” 

2 Another papyrus adds the words, ‘‘I have advanced, and 


behold, I have not been found light, and the Balance is empty of 
my affair.” 


400 OF PERFECTING THE SPIRIT (Chap. exxxiii. x 


CHAPTER CXXXIII. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 16). ] 


f ese |} 


Ss 
Oiagasiwawn 


‘ 


Vignette: The god Ra, hawk-headed and having upon his 
g ’ § up 
head the sun’s disk, seated upon the cubit of Maat in a boat; 
before him he holds the emblem of “life.” Above him is the 
legend, ‘ Ra in his shrine.” With him, in the boat, stands Ani 
> ? ) ) ? 
who “maketh adoratipn to Ra each day,” with both hands 
raised in adoration. 


Text: (1) Tur Book OF MAKING PERFECT THE 
Kuu, (2) WHICH IS TO BE RECITED ON THE DAY OF 
THE MONTH. ‘The Osiris Nu, the overseer of the house 
of the overseer of the seal, triumphant, saith :— 

“Ra riseth in his horizon, and his company of the . 
“ods follow after him, The god cometh forth out of 
“his hidden (3) habitations, and food falleth out of the 
“eastern horizon of heaven at the word of the goddess 
“Nut who maketh plain the paths of Ra, whereupon 
‘straightway the Prince goeth round about. (4) Lift 
“up then thyself, O thou Ra, who dwellest in thy 


Chap, cxxxiii.13] OF PERFECTING THE SPIRIT 401 


“divine shrine, draw thou into thyself the winds, 
“inhale the north wind, swallow thou the skin (?) of 
“(5) thy net on the day wherein thou byeathest right 
“and truth. Thou separatest the divine followers, and 
“thou sailest in [thy] boat to Nut; the divine princes 
(6) march onwards at thy word. Thou takest count of 
“thy bones, thou gatherest together thy members, thou 
“settest thy face towards the beautiful Amentet, and 
“thou comest, being renewed each day. Behold, 
“(7) thou art that Image of gold, and thou dost possess 
“the splendours of the disks of heaven and art terrible ; 
“thou comest, being renewed each day. (8) Hail, the 
“horizon rejoiceth, and there are shouts of joy in the 
“rigoinge [of thy boat]; when the gods who dwell in 
“the heavens see the Osiris Nu, the overseer of the 
“house of the overseer of the seal, triumphant, (9) they 
“ascribe unto him as his due praises which are like 
“unto those ascribed unto Ra. The Osiris Nu, the 
“overseer of the house of the overseer of the seal, 
“triumphant, is a divine prince and he seeketh (?) the 
“wreret crown of Ra, (10) and he, the only one, is 
“strong in good fortune (?) in that supreme body which 
“is of those divine beings who are in the presence of 
“Ra, (11) The Osiris Nu is strong both upon earth 
“and in the underworld; and the Osiris Nu is strong 
“like unto Ra every day. (12) The Osiris Nu shall 
“not tarry, and he shall not lie without motion in this 
“Jand for ever. Being doubly beautiful [he] shall see 
“with his two eyes, and he shall hear (18) with his 
. VOL, II. N 


402 OF PERFECTING THE SPIRIT [Chap. exxxiii, 14 


“two ears; rightly and truly, rightly and truly. The 
“Osiris Nu is like unto Ra, and he setteth in order the 
“oars [of his,boat| among those who are in the train of 
(14) Nu. He doth not-tell that which he hath seen, 
“and he doth not repeat that which he hath heard in 
“the secret places. Hail, (15) let there be shouts of 
‘‘joy to the Osiris Nu, who is of the divine body of Ra, 
“as he journeyeth over Nu, and who propitiateth the 
“KA of the god (16) with that which he loveth. The 
“Osiris Nu, the overseer of the house of the overseer of 
“the seal, is a hawk, the transformations of which are 
“mighty (or manifold).”} * 


RUBRIC: [This chapter shall be recited over a boat four? 
cubits in its length (17) and made of green porcelain [on which 
have been painted] the divine sovereign chiefs of the cities; 
and a heaven with its stars shall [also] be made, and this thou 


shalt have made ceremonially pure by means of natron and 
incense. And, behold, (18) thou shalt make an image of Ra in 
yellow (?) colour upon a new plaque and set it at the bows of 
the boat. And behold, thou shalt make an image of the khu 


1 The Papyrus of Nebseni has, ‘‘ The Osiris Nebseni is the lord 
of transformations in the presence of the hawk of gold.” 
2 The Papyrus of Ani has ‘‘ seven cubits.” 


Chap, exxxiii,21] OF PERFECTING THE SPIRIT 403 


(19) which thou dost wish to make perfect [and place it] in this 
boat, and thou shalt make it to travel about in the boat [which 
shall be made in the form of the boat] of Ra; and he shall see 
the god Ra (20) himself therein. Let not the eye of any man 
whatsoever look upon it with the exception of thine own self, 
or thy father,! or thy son, and guard [this] with great care.” 
[ Now these things] shall make the hu perfect in the heart of 
Ra, and it shall give unto him power with the company of the 
gods; and the gods shall look upon him as a divine being like 
unto themselves; (21) and mankind and the dead shall look 
upon him and shall fall down upon their faces, and he shall be 
seen in the underworld in the form of the radiance of Ra. 


CHAPTER CXXXIV. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 17). ] 


Vignette :3 The boat of the sun, before which stand the 
deceased and his daughter‘; on the bows is perched the hawk 
of Horus with the crown of the South upon his head. In the 
boat are the gods Shu, Tefnut, Seb, Nut, Osiris, Isis, and 
Hathor, human-headed, and Horus, hawk-headed. In the 
Saite Recension the gods in the boat are nine in number, and ° 
behind them is the disk of the sun (see Lepsius, op. ezt., BI. 55). 


1 The words ‘‘ or thy father” are from the Papyrus of Ani. — 

2 These words are from the Brocklehurst papyrus (see Naville, 
op. cit., Bd. II. p. 334). There are three copies of this rubric 
extant, and no one of them is complete! 

3 See the Papyrus of Nebseni, sheet 6. 

4 Called ‘‘ Thent-Men-nefer.” 


404 OF PERFECTING THE SPIRIT (Chap. exxxiv. x 


Text: (1) ANOTHER CHAPTER OF MAKING PERFECT 
THE Kuu.! The Osiris Nu, the overseer of the house 
of the overseer of the seal, triumphant, saith :— 


“Homage to thee, O thou who art within thy divine 
“shrine, who shinest with rays of light (2) and sendest 
“forth radiance from thyself, who decreest joy for mil- 
“lions of years unto those who love him, who givest 
“their heart’s desire unto mankind, thou god Khepera 


“within thy boat who hast overthrown (3) Apep. O 
‘‘ve children of the god Seb, overthrow ye the enemies 
“of Osiris Nu, the overseer of the house of the overseer 
“of the seal, triumphant, and destroy ye them (4) from 
“the boat of Ra; and the god Horus shall cut off their 
‘heads in heaven [where they are] in the form of 
‘feathered fowl, and their hind parts shall be on the 
‘earth in the form of animals and in the Lake in the 
“form of (5) fishes. Every male fiend and every female 
“fiend shall the Osiris Nu, the overseer of the house of 


1 In the Papyrus of Nebseni the title of this Chapter reads :— 
““The Chapter of embarking in the boat of Ra and of being with 
those who are in his following.” 


Chap. cxxxiv.14] OF PERFECTING THE SPIRIT 405 


‘‘the overseer of the seal, destroy, whether he descendeth 
“from the heaven, or whether he cometh forth from (6) 
“the earth, or whether they come upon the waters, or 
“whether they advance towards the stars, the god 
“Thoth, the son of Aner, coming forth from the Anerti, 
“shall hack them in pieces. The Osiris (7) Nu is silent 
“and dumb (?); cause ye this god, the mighty one of 
“slaughter, the being greatly to be feared, to make 
“himself clean in your blood and to bathe (8) himself 
“in your gore, and ye shall certainly be destroyed by 
“him (9) from the boat of his father Ra. The Osiris 
“Nu is the god Horus to whom his mother the goddess 
“Tsis hath given birth, (10) and whom the goddess 
“Nephthys hath nursed and dandled, even like Horus 
“when [he] repulsed the fiends of the god Suti; and 
“when they see the wreret crown stablished (11) upon 
“his head they fall down upon their faces and they 
“olorify [him]. Behold, when men, and gods, and 
“ Khus, and the dead see the Osiris (12) Nu in the 
“form of Horus with the wreret crown stablished upon 
“his head, they fall down upon their faces. And the 
‘Osiris Nu, the overseer of the house of the overseer 
“of the seal, (13) triumphant, is victorious over his 
“enemies in the heights of heaven, and in the depths 
“thereof, and before the divine sovereign chiefs of 
“every god and of every goddess.” 


RUBRIC: (14) [This chapter] shall be recited over a hawk 
standing and having the white crown upon his head, [and 
over figures of] Tem, Shu, Tefnut, Seb, Nut, Osiris, Isis, Suti, 


406 CHAPTER OF THE NEW MOON [Ch. exxxiv. 15 


and Nephthys painted in yellow:colour (15) upon a new plaque, 
which shall be placed in [a model of] the boat [of the sun], 
along with a figure of the deceased whom thou wouldst make 
perfect. These shalt thou anoint with cedar oil, and (16) in- 
cense shall be offered up to them on the fire, and feathered 
fowl shall be roasted. It is an act of praise to Ra as he 
journeyeth, and it shall cause a man to have his being (17) 
along with Ra day by day, whithersoever the god voyageth ; 
and it shall destroy the enemies of Ra in very truth regularly 
and continually. 


CHAPTER CXXXY. 
[From Lepsius, Todtenbuch, Bl. 55. ] 
Vignette : This Chapter has no vignette. 


Text: ANOTHER CHAPTER TO BE RECITED WHEN 
THE MOON RENEWETH ITSELF ON THE DAY OF THE 
montH. The Osiris Auf-ankh, triumphant, saith :— 

‘“(1) Osiris unfettereth,” or, as others say, “ openeth 
“the storm cloud [in] the body of heaven, and is un- 
‘fettered himself; Horus is made strong happily each 
‘““day. He whose transformations are great (or many) 
“hath offerings made unto him at the moment, (2) and 
‘he hath made an end of the storm which is in the 
“face of the Osiris Auf-ankh, triumphant. Verily he 
“cometh, and he is Ra in [his] journeying, and he is 
“the four celestial gods in the heavens above. The 


Ch. exxxvi.a.2} OF TRAVELLING IN THE BOAT OF RA 407 


“Osiris Auf-ankh, triumphant, cometh forth (3) in his 
“day, and he embarketh among the tackle of the 
“boat.” 


RUBRIC: If this chapter be known by the deceased he shall 
become a perfect khu in the underworld, and he shall not die 
therein a second time, and he shall eat his food side by side 
with Osiris. (4) If this chapter be known by him upon earth 
he shall be like unto Thoth, and he shall be adored by the 
living ones; he shall not fall headlong at the moment of royal 
flame of the goddess Bast, and the mighty princess shall make 
him to advance happily. 


CHAPTER CXXXVIa. (L) 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 28). ] 


5 iS = BEEN 
USSSSSSSSSSSS539525555959555555359555355555555555555555555335535I3555333SSI3599553593S939 9033590) 


Vignette: Three boats. In the first are Osiris, Horus (or, 
Ra), the deceased, and others; in the second and third are the 
two divine hawks on standards. 


Text: (1) ANOTHER CHAPTER OF TRAVELLING IN 
THE GREAT Boat or Ra. The Osiris Nu, the over- 
seer of the house of the overseer of the seal, trium- 
phant, saith :— (2) 

“ Behold now, O ye luminaries in Annu, ye people in 


408 OF PERFECTING THE SPIRIT  [Ch.cxxavi.a.1. 3 


“ Kheraha, the god Kha (?) hath been born; his cordage 
(3) hath been completed, and the instrument where- 
“with he maketh his way hath [he] grasped firmly. I 
“have protected the implements of the gods, and I 
‘delivered the boat Kha (?) for him. I have come 
“forth into heaven, and I have travelled therein with 
‘Ra in the form of an ape, and have (4) turned 
“back the paths of Nut at the staircase of the god 
“ Sebek.” 


CHAPTER CXXXVIa. (IL.) 
[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 16). ] 


Vignette: In the Theban Recension this Chapter has no 

vignette, but in the Saite Recension the deceased stands in the 

boat of the god Ra who is seated therein (see Lepsius, op. cit., 
BI. 56). 

Text: (1) ANOTHER CHAPTER OF MAKING PERFECT 
THE AHU; [it shall be recited] on the festival of Six. 
The Osiris Nu, the overseer of the house of the over- 
seer of the seal, triumphant, saith :— 


“Behold now, O ye luminaries in Annu (Heliopolis), 
‘ye people in (2) Kher-aha, the god hath been born ;_ 
“his cordage (?) hath been completed, and the instru- 
“ment wherewith he maketh his way he hath grasped 


“firmly ; and the Osiris Nu is strong (3) with them to 


Ch, cxxxvi.a. 2, 12] OF PERFECTING THE SPIRIT 409 


“direct the implement of the gods. The Osiris Nu hath 
“delivered the boat of the sun therewith ...... 
“and he cometh forth (4) into heaven. The Osiris Nu 
“saileth round about in heaven, he travelleth therein 
“unto Nut, he journeyeth along with Ra, and he 
“voyageth therein in the form of (5) apes; [he] 
“turneth back the water-flood which is over the 
“Thigh of the goddess Nut at the staircase of the 
“ood Sebaku. (6) The hearts of Seb and Nut are 
“olad and repeat the name which is new. Un-neferu 
“reneweth [his] youth, Ra is in his splendours of light, 
“(7) Unti hath his speech, and lo, the god of the In- 
“undation is Prince among the gods. The taste of 
“sweetness hath forced a way into the heart of the 
“destitute one, and the lord of thy outeries (8) hath 
“been done away with, and the oars (?) of the com- 
“pany of the gods are in vigorous motion. Adored be 
“thou, O divine Soul, who art endowed more: than the 
“gods of the South and North [in] their splendours! 
‘Behold, (9) grant thou that the Osiris Nu may be 
“oreat in heaven even as thou art great among the 
“gods; deliver thou him from every evil and mur- 
“derous thing which may be wrought (10) upon him 
“by the Fiend, and fortify thou his heart. Grant 
“thou, moreover, that the Osiris Nu may be stronger 
“than all the gods, all the Ahus, and all the dead. 
“(11) The Osiris Nu is strong and is the lord of 
“powers. The Osiris Nu is the lord of right and 
“truth (12) which the goddess Uatchit worketh. The 


410 OF PERFECTING THE SPIRIT (Ch. exxxvi.a. 2. 13 


“ strength which protects the Osiris Nu is the strength 
“which protects the god Ra in heaven. O god Ra, 
“orant thou that the Osiris Nu may travel on (13) in 
“thy boat in peace, and do thou prepare a road where- 
‘on [thy] boat may journey onwards; for the force 
“which protecteth (14) Osiris is the force which pro- 
“tecteth thee. The Osiris Nu driveth back the Croco- 
“dile from Ra day by day. (15) The Osiris Nu cometh 
“even as doth Horus in the splendours (?) of the horizon 
“of heaven, and he directeth (16) Ra through the 
“mansions of the sky; the gods rejoice greatly when 
“the Osiris Nu repulseth the Crocodile. The Osiris 
“Nu hath the amulet (?) of the god, and (17) the cloud 
“of Nebt shall not come nigh unto him, and the divine 
‘“ouardians of the mansions of the sky shall not destroy 
“him, ‘The Osiris Nu is a (18) divine being whose 
“face is hidden, and he dwelleth within the Great 
‘House [as] the chief of the Shrine of the god. ‘The 
“Osiris Nu carrieth the words of the god to Ra, (19) 
“and he cometh and maketh supplication unto the 
“divine lord with the words of his message. The 
“Osiris Nu is strong of heart, and he maketh his 
“offering at the moment (20) among those who perform 
“the ceremonies of sacrifice.” 

RUBRIC: [This chapter] shall be said over a figure of the 
deceased which shall be placed in [a model of ] the boat of the 
sun, and behold, [he that reciteth it] shall be washed, and 
shall be ceremonially pure, (21) and he shall have burnt incense 


before Ra, and shall have offered wine, and cakes, and roasted 
fowl for the journey [of the deceased] in the boat of Ra. Now, 


Ch. exxxvis.2] .OF PERFECTING THE SPIRIT 411 


every (22) khw for whom such things are done shall have an 
existence among the living ones, and he shall never perish, 
and he shall have a being like unto that of the holy God; no 
evil thing whatsoever shall attack him. (23) And he shall be 
like unto a happy khw in Amentet, and he shall not die a 
second time. He shall eat and he shall drink in the presence 
of Osiris each day; he shall be borne along (24) with the kings 
of the North and of the South each and every day; he shall 
quaff water at the fountain-head; he shall come forth by day 
even as doth Horus; (25) he shall live and shall become like 
unto God; and he shall be hymned by the living ones, even as 
is Ra each and every day continually and regularly for ever. 


CHAPTER CXXXVIb. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 28). ] 


—— 
LLREEKRERE KE EF | 
Vignette : A boat in which is the head of a hawk, emblematic 
of Ra, whereupon is a disk encircled by a serpent, sailing over 
a heaven of stars; over the bows and stern are utchats, or 
symbolic eyes. 


= 


Text: (1) Tue CHAPTER OF SAILING IN THE 
Great Boat or RA TO PASS OVER (2) THE CIRCLE 
OF BRIGHT FLAME. ‘The Osiris Nu, the overseer of 


AI2 OF PERFECTING THE SPIRIT (Ch, exxxvi.s.3 


the house of the overseer of the seal, triumphant, 
saith :— 

“{Hail], ye bright and shining flames which keep 
“your place behind Ra, and which slay (3) behind him, 
“the boat of Ra is in fear of the whirlwind and the 
“storm; shine ye forth, then, and make [ye yourselves] 
“visible. I have come [daily] along with the god 
“Sek-hra from the bight of his holy lake, (4) and I 
“have seen the Maat [goddesses] pass along, and the 
“TLion-gods who belong unto them. Hail, thou that 
“ dwellest in the coffer, who hast multitudes of plants (?), 
“T (5) have seen [what is] there. We rejoice, and 
“their princes rejoice greatly, and their lesser gods (?) 
“are glad. I have made a (6) way in front of the boat 
“of Ra, I have lifted myself up into his divine Disk, 
“T shine brightly through his splendours; he hath 
“furnished himself with the things which are his, 
“taking possession thereof as the lord of right and 
“truth. (7) And behold, O ye company of the gods, 
“and thou ancestor of the goddess Isis,’ grant ye that 
“he may bear testimony to his father, the lord of those 
“who are therein. I have (8) weighed the...... ; 
“in him [as] chief, and I have brought to him the 
“ooddess Tefnut, and he liveth. Behold, come, come, 
“and declare before him the testimony (9) of right and 
“truth of the lord Tem. I cry out at eventide and at 
“his hour, saying ;—Grant ye unto me (10) that I may 
“come. I have brought unto him the jaws of the 

1 Read “ god Osiris ” ? 


Ch. cxxxvi.B.18] OF PERFECTING THE SPIRIT 413 


“passages of the tomb; I have brought unto him the 
“bones which are in Annu (Heliopolis); (11) I have 
“oathered together for him his manifold parts; I have 
“driven back for him the serpent fiend Apep; I have 
“spit upon his gashes for him; I have made my road 
“and I have passed in (12) among you. I am he who 
“dwelleth among the gods, come, let [me] pass onwards 
“in the boat, the boat of the lord Sa. Behold, O 
“ Fleru-ur, (13) there is a flame, but the fire hath been 
“extinguished. Ihave made [my] road, O ye divine 
“fathers and your divine apes! I have entered upon 
“the horizon, and I have passed on (14) to the side of 
“the divine princes, and I have borne testimony unto 
“him that dwelleth in his divine boat. I have gone 
“forward over the circle of bright (15) flame which is 
“behind the lord of the lock of hair which moveth 
“round about. Behold, ye who cry out over your- 
‘selves, ye worms in [your] hidden places, grant ye 
“that I may pass onwards, (16) for I am the mighty 
“one, the lord of divine strength, and I am the spiritual 
“body (sah) of the lord of divine right and truth made 
“by the goddess Uatchit. His strength which pro- 
“tecteth (17) is my strength which protecteth, which is 
“the strength which protecteth Ra. [Grant ye that I 
“may be in the following of Ra], and grant ye that I 
“may go round about with him in Sekhet-hetep [and 
“in| the two lands. (18) [I am] a great god, and [I 
“have been| judged by the company of his gods; grant 
‘that divine, sepulchral meals may be given unto me,” 


414 THE FOUR FLAMES OF THE SPIRED (iGinecxxyn.: 


CHAPTER CXXXYVIIa. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 26). ] 


Vignette : Four men, each holding a flame, standing in the 
presence of a god, before whom are four pools or lakes. 


Text: (1) Tue CHarren OF THE FOUR BLAZING 
FLAMES WHICH ARE MADE FoR THE Kuu, Behold, 
thou shalt make four square troughs of clay, (2) whereon 
thou shalt scatter incense, and thou shalt fill them 
with the milk of a white cow, and by means of these 
thou shalt extinguish the flame. (3) The Osiris Nu, 
the overseer of the house of the overseer of the seal, 
triumphant, saith :— 


“The fire cometh to thy Ka, O Osiris, governor of 
“ Amenti; the fire (4) cometh to thy Ka, O Osiris Nu, 
“the overseer of the house of the overseer of the seal, 
“triumphant. He that ordereth the night cometh 
“after the day. (5) [The flame cometh to thy Ka, 


Ch, exxxvii.a.15] THE FOUR FLAMES OF THE SPIRIT 415 


“O Osiris, governor of those in Amenti]! and the two 
“sisters (?) of Ra come likewise. Behold, [the flame] 
“riseth in Abtu (Abydos) and it cometh; and I cause it 
“to come [to] (6) the Eye of Horus. It is set in order 
“upon thy brow, O Osiris, governor of Amenti,? and it 
“qs (7) fixed within thy shrine and riseth upon thy 
“brow; it is set in order upon thy breast, O Osiris Nu, 
(8). and it is fixed upon thy brow. The Eye of Horus 
“is protecting thee, O Osiris, governor of Amenti, and 
“it keepeth thee (9) in safety; it casteth down headlong 
“all thine enemies for thee, and all thine enemies have 
“fallen headlong before thee. (10) O Osiris Nu, the 
“Kye of Horus protecteth thee, it keepeth thee in 
“safety, and it casteth down headlong (11) all thine 
“enemies. Thine enemies have fallen down headlong 
“before thy Ka, O Osiris, governor of (12) Amenti, the 
“Hye of Horus protecteth thee, it keepeth thee in 
“safety, and it hath cast down headlong all thine 
“enemies. (13) Thine enemies have fallen down head- 
“Jong before thy Ka, O Osiris Nu, the overseer of the 
“house of the overseer of the seal, triumphant, (14) the 
“Bye of Horus protecteth thee, it keepeth thee in 
“safety, it hath cast down headlong for thee all thine 
“enemies, and thine enemies have fallen down headlong 
“before thee. The Hye of Horus (15) cometh, it is 
“sound and well, and it sendeth forth rays like unto 
“Ra in the horizon; it covereth over with darkness the 


! Added from the Papyrus of Nebseni. 
2 In the Papyrus of Nebseni the deceased is here addressed. 


416 THE FOUR FLAMES OF THE SPIRIT _[Ch, exxxvii.a, 16 


“powers of Suti, it taketh possession thereof, and it 
‘‘bringeth its flame (16) against him upon [its] feet (?). 
“The Eye of Horus is sound and well, thou eatest the 
“flesh (?) of thy body by means thereof, and thou 
‘‘ oivest praise (?) thereto. The four flames enter into 
“thy Ka, O Osiris, governor of (17) Amenti, the four 
“flames enter into thy Ka, O Osiris Nu, the overseer 
“of the house of the overseer of the seal, triumphant. 
“ Hail, ye children of Horus, Mesthi, Hapi, Tuamautef, 
“(18) and Qebhsennuf, ye have given your protection 
“unto your divine Father Osiris, the governor of 
“ Amenti, grant ye your protection to the Osiris Nu, 
“triumphant. (19) Now therefore, inasmuch as ye 
“have destroyed the opponent|s] of Osiris, the governor 
“of Amenti, he liveth with the gods, and he hath 
“smitten Suti with his hand and arm since light 
“dawned upon the earth, and Horus hath gotten 
‘power, (20) and he hath avenged his divine Father 
“Osiris himself; and inasmuch as your divine father 
“hath been made vigorous through the union which ye 
“have effected for him with the Ka of Osiris, the 
“ Governor of Amenti—now the Eye of Horus (21) hath 
“avenged him, and it hath protected him, and it hath 
“cast down headlong for him all his enemies, and all 
“his enemies have fallen down before him—even so do 
“ye destroy the (22) opponent|s] of the Osiris Nu, the 
“overseer of the house of the overseer of the seal, 
“triumphant. Let him live with the gods, let him 
‘smite down his enemy, let him destroy [him] (23) when 


Ch. exxxvii.a. 31] THE FOUR FLAMES OF THE SPIRIT 417 


“light dawneth upon the earth, let Horus gain power 
“and avenge the Osiris Nu, let the Osiris Nu have 
“vigour through the union which ye have effected for 
“him with his Ka. (24) O Osiris Nu, the Kye of Horus 
“hath avenged thee, it hath cast down headlong all 
“thine enemies for thee, and all thine enemies have 
“fallen down headlong before thee. Hail, Osiris, 
“(25) Governor of Amenti, grant thou light and fire 
“to the happy soul which is in Suten-henen (Hera- 
“cleopolis); and [O ye children of Horus] grant ye 
“power unto the living soul of the (26) Osiris Nu 
“within his flame. Let him not be repulsed and let 
“him not be driven back at the doors of Amentet; O 
“Jet his offermgs of bread and of linen garments be 
“brought unto him (27) among [those of] the lords of 
‘funeral oblations, O offer ye praises as unto a god to 
“the Osiris Nu, destroyer of his opponent[s] in his 
“form of right and truth and in his (28) attributes of a 
“ood of right and truth.” 

RUBRIC: [This chapter] shall be recited over four fires 
[made of] afma cloth which hath been anointed with hatet 
unguent of Thehennu, and they shall be placed in the hands 
of four men who shall have the names of the pillars of Horus 
written (29) upon their shoulders, and they shall burn the 
fires in the beautiful rays of Ra, and this shall confer power 
and might upon the Khu among the stars which never set. 
If this chapter be recited (30) for him he shall never, never 
fail, and he shall become a living soul for ever, and these 
fires shall make the Ahw as vigorous as Osiris, (31) the 
Governor of Amenti, regularly and continually for ever. It 


is a great struggle. Thou shalt not perform this ceremony 
before any human being except thine own self, or thy father, 


VOL, If. 0 


418 THE FOUR FLAMES OF THE SPIRIT  [Ch. exxxvii.a. 32 


(32) or thy son, because it is an exceedingly great mystery of 
Amentet, and is a type of the hidden things of the under- 
world, for when [this ceremony hath been performed] the 
gods, and the Khuws, and the dead shall see him (33) in the 
form of the Governor of Amenti, and he shall have power and 
dominion like this god. 

If thou shalt undertake to perform for him [what is ordered ] 
in this ‘‘ Chapter of the four blazing flames”’ each [day ?] (34) 
thou shalt cause the form of the deceased to come forth from 
every hall [in the underworld] and from the seven halls of 
Osiris. And he shall have an existence in the form of the 
god, he shall have power and dominion corresponding to that 
of the gods and the Khus (35) for ever and ever; he shall enter 
in through the hidden pylons and shall not be turned back 
before the god Osiris. And it shall come to pass, if these 
things have been done for him, that he shall enter in and 
come forth, (36) he shall not be turned back, no limit [to his 
journeying] shall be set, and he shall not have sentence of evil 
passed upon him on the day of the weighing of words before the 
god Osiris for ever and ever. 

And thou shalt perform [what is ordered in] this book for 
(37) the deceased, and he shall become perfect and pure, and 
[thou shalt] open his mouth with the iron instrument, and 
shalt write down these writings in accordance with the things 
which are found in the books of the royal son Heru-ta-ta-f, 
(38) who discovered [them] in a hidden chest—now they were 
in the handwriting of the god himself—in the Temple of the 
goddess Unnut, the Lady of Unnu (Hermopolis), during his 
journey to make an inspection (39) of the temples, and of the 
lands, and of the funeral shrines of the gods. And these things 
shall be done secretly in the underworld, they are mysteries of 
the underworld, and they are (40) a type of the mysteries of 
Neter-khert. 


And thou shalt say:—‘[I] have come advancing 
“quickly and casting light upon [his] footsteps, and 
‘hiding [myself] to cast light upon his hidden place (?). 
“T stand up behind the Tet; I (41) stand up behind 


Ch, exxxvii.a. 48] THE FOUR FLAMES OF THE SPIRIT 419 


“the Jet of Ra turning back the slaughter. I am 
“protecting thee, O Osiris.” 

RUBRIC: This chapter shall be recited over a Tet of crystal 
which is set up upon a brick (42) made of green clay whereupon 
hath been inscribed this chapter. Then thou shalt make a 
cavity in the west wall, and, having [turned] the front of 
the 7'ct towards the east [therein] thou shalt wall it up with 


earth moistened with (43) cedar juice (?). It will repulse the 
enemies of Osiris who set themselves at the east wall. 


And thou shalt say :—“[I] have driven back [thy 
“foes, and I| have kept watch for thee; and he that is 
“upon his mountain (i.e., Anubis) hath kept watch (44) 
“at thy moment, and hath repulsed [thy foes for thee]. 
“T have driven back the Crocodile [for thee] at thy 
“moment, and I am protecting thee, O Osiris Nu, the 
“overseer of the house of the overseer of the seal, 
“triumphant.” (45) 

RUBRIC: This chapter shall be recited over [a figure of ] 
Anubis made of green clay kneaded (?) with incense and set 
up on a brick of green clay whereupon it hath been inscribed. 
(46) Then thou shalt make a cavity in the east wall, and having 
[turned] the face of Anubis towards the west [therein], thou 


shalt wallit up. [It will repulse the enemies of Osiris] who 
set themselves at the south (west?) wall. (47) 


And thou shalt say :—“I am the collar (or girdle) of 
“sand round the hidden coffer turning back the arm 
“from the blazing flame of the funeral mountain; I 
‘have marched over the roads, and I am protecting the 
“ Osiris (48) Nu, the overseer of the house of the over- 
“seer of the seal, triumphant.” 


420 THE FOUR FLAMES OF THE SPIRIT [Ch cxxxvii.a. 49 


RUBRIC: [This chapter] shall be recited over a brick of 
green clay whereupon it hath been inscribed; and thou shalt 
place incense (?) in the middle thereof, (49) and thou shalt 
smear it with pitch (or resin) and set light to it. Then thou 
shalt make a cavity in the south wall, and having [turned] the 
front of the brick towards the north [therein], thou shalt wall 
it up. [It will repulse the enemies of Osiris] who set them- 
selves at the (50) north wall. 


And thou shalt say :—‘O thou that comest to make 
‘a burning, I will not let thee do it; O thou that 
““comest to shoot forth [fire], I will not let thee do it. 
“T will burn thee, I will shoot forth [fire] (51) at thee, 
“for I am protecting the Osiris Nu, the overseer of the 
“house of the overseer of the seal, triumphant.” 


RUBRIC: [This chapter] shall be recited over a brick of 
green clay whereupon it hath been inscribed, along with a 
figure (?) of a (52) palm tree seven fingers in height; and thou 
shalt open its mouth. Then thou shalt make a cavity in the 
north wall, and having [turned] the face of the figure towards 
the south [therein], thou shalt wall it up [it will repulse the 
enemies of Osiris who set themselves at the south wall]. 


“And behold, these things shall be performed by a 
‘man who is clean and is (538) ceremonially pure, 
“one who hath eaten neither meat nor fish, and who 
“hath not [recently] had intercourse with women; and 
“behold, thou shalt make offerings of cakes and ale, 
“and shalt burn incense on the fire of these gods. 
“(54) And every Khw for whom these things shall 
“he done shall become like a holy god in the under- 
‘world ; he shall not be turned back at any gate in 
“Amentet, and he shall be in the following of (55) 


Ch, cxxxvii.n. 2 | OF KINDLING A FLAME A21I 


“Osiris, wheresoever he goeth, regularly and con- 


1 


“tinually, 


CHAPTER CXXXVIIs. 


[From the Papyrus of Nebseni (Brit. Mus. No. 9900, sheet 6).] 


2t Hh @ et 


Vignette : The goddess Api, the lady who giveth protection, 

in the form of a hippopotamus, setting light to a vessel of 

incense. In the Saite Recension the deceased is seen sitting 

upon a chair with two burning lamps on each side of him (see 

Lepsius, Yodtenbuch, Bl. 56); there the Chapter is called, 
* Chapter of making the flame to burn up.” 


Text: (1) THe\ CHAPTER OF KINDLING A FLAME BY 
NEBSENI, THE SCRIBE AND DRAUGHTSMAN IN THE 
TEMPLE OF Pran. [He saith] :— 

“The white (or) shining Hye of Horus cometh. (2) 
“The brilliant Kye of Horus cometh. It cometh in 

! The version of this Chapter found in the Papyrus of Nebseni 
(sheet 24) is much shorter than that here given, and that Papyrus 
omits all the supplementary Chapters and rubrics which are written 
in the Papyrus of Nu; a version much shorter still is given by 


Naville (op. cit., Bd. IL. p. 861) from the Papyrus of Nefer-uben-f 
in Paris. 


422 OF KINDLING A FLAME [Ch. cxxxvii.B. 3 


“peace, it sendeth forth rays of light unto Ra in the 
‘horizon, and it destroyeth the powers (3) of Set 
“according to the decree (?). It leadeth them on, 
“and it taketh possession [of him], and its flame is 
“kindled against him. [Its] flame cometh and goeth 
“about, and bringeth (4) adoration (?); [it] cometh and 
‘‘ooeth about heaven in the train of Ra upon the two 
“hands of thy two sisters, O Ra. The Eye of Horus 
“liveth, yea liveth within the. great hall; the Eye of 
‘Horus liveth, yea liveth, and is An-Maut-f.” 


Ch, cxxxviii. ] OF ENTERING INTO ABYDOS 423 


CHAPTER CXXXVIII. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 19). ] 


Vignette: The standard, emblematic of the nome of Teni, 
the capital of which was Abydos, surmounted by plumes and 
uraeus, etc., being set up by Isis and Osiris. On each side 
winged utchats, a fan or fly-flapper held upright by an emblem 
of life from which project human hands and arms, the hawk 
emblematic of Horus-Sept, a ram having plumes above his 
horns, and three gods standing upright. On one side are tke 


424 OF ENTERING INTO ABYDOS — [Ch, exxxviii. 1 


Souls of Pe, and the jackal, emblem of Anpu (Anubis) or of 

Ap-uat; and on the other are the Souls of Tep and the jackal, 

emblem of Ap-uat or of Anpu. Beneath the standard are the 

lion-gods of the ‘horizon, one of whom is called “ Yesterday” 
and the other “ To-day.” 


Text: (1) Tae CHAPTER OF ENTERING INTO Apru, 
AND OF BEING IN THE FOLLOWING oF Ostris. The 
Osiris Nu, the overseer of the house of the overseer 
of the seal, triumphant, saith :— (2) 

“Hail, ye gods who dwell in Abtu (Abydos), ye 
‘divine sovereign chiefs who are gathered together, 
“come ye forward with joy and gladness to (3) meet 
‘me, and look ye upon my divine father Osiris. I 
“have been judged, and I have come forth from his 
“shrine. Iam Horus, the lord of Qemt (Egypt), and 
‘of the (4) red hilly desert; I have taken possession 
“thereof. There is none who hath power over him, 
“his Kye is mighty against his enemies, he hath 
“avenged his divine Father, he hath destroyed the 
‘““waterflood of his mother, he hath (5) crushed his 
‘enemies, he hath put down violence mightily, and 
“hath stilled the strength of the god Nebt. The 
“divine prince of many peoples, the sovereign of the 
“two lands, hath taken possession of the house of his 
‘divine Father (6) by means of the written decrees. I 
“have been tried in the Balance, my word is right and 
‘true, I have gained the mastery over my enemies, and 
‘bring to naught (?) the things (7) which they work 
“against me. I am strong in the strength which pre- 


Ch. cxl. THE BOOK OF tHE FULE, UTCHAT 425 


“tecteth me, I am the son of Osiris, and my divine 
“Father protecteth his body with strength and 
“might (?).” 


CHAPTER CXXXIX. 


[See Chapter CX XIII. ] 


CHAPTER CXL. 


{From Lepsius, Todtenbuch, Bl. 57. ] 


Vignette: The deceased kneeling, with both hands raised in 
adoration, before the jackal of Anubis, which is couchant on a 
pylon, a kneeling figure having an wtchat on his head, and the 


god Ra. 


Text: 'nHr Book WHICH IS TO BE RECITED ON THE 
LAST DAY OF THE SECOND MONTH OF THE SEASON 


426 THE BOOK OF THE FULL UDCHAT SS iiiG@arerina 


PERT’ WHEN THE UTCHAT IS FULL IN THE SECOND 
MONTH OF THE SEASON PERT. (1) The Osiris Auf- 
ankh saith :— 

“The divine Power hath risen and-shineth [in] the 
“horizon, and the god Tem hath risen [out of] the 
“odour of that which floweth from him. The Khus 
“shine in heaven and Het-benbenet (2) rejoiceth, for 
“there is among them a form which is like unto them- 
“selves; and there are shouts and cries of gladness 
‘within the shrine, and the sounds of those who rejoice 
“90 round about through the underworld, (3) and 
“homage [is paid] unto him at the decree of Tem 
“and Heru-khuti (Harmachis), His Majesty ordereth 
“the company of the gods to follow in the train of his 
“Majesty; his Majesty ordereth the calling of the 
“Utchat with you [to] (4) my members. He hath 
“oiven strength to all my limbs, and hath made them 
‘vigorous with that which cometh forth from the mouth 
“of His Majesty. His divine Kye resteth upon its seat 
“with His Majesty at that hour (5) of the night on the 
“day (?) of the fulfilment of the fourth hour (or four 
hours) of the beautiful land (?), on the last day of the 
“second month of the season pert. ‘The Majesty of the 
‘“ Utehat is in the presence of the company of the gods, 
‘and His Majesty shineth as he shone in the primeval 
“time, when the Véchat was [first] (6) upon his head. 
“Ra, Tem, Utchatet, Shu, Seb, Osiris, Suti, Horus, 


! T.e., the sixth month of the Egyptian year, which the Egyptian 
Christians or Copts call Mekhir USyIp or HGNIP, Gr. Mexip. 


Ch, cxl.13] THE BOOK OF THE FULL UTCHAT 427 


“Menth, Bah, Ra-er-Neheh, Tehuti, Naam, (7) Tchetta, 
“Nut, Isis, Nephthys, Hathor, Nekht, Mert (7), Maat, 
“ Anpu, and Ta-mes-tchetta [are] the soul and body of 
“Ra. (8) The computation of the Utchat hath been 
“made in the presence of the divine lord of this earth ; 
“it is full to the uttermost, and it resteth (or setteth). 
“And these gods are rejoicing on this day, and they 
“have their hands beneath (?) them, and the festival of 
“every god (9) having been celebrated, they say :— 
“Hail, praise be unto thee, O thou who art as Ra, 
“yejoice in him, for the mariners of [his] boat sail 
“yound about, and [he] hath overthrown the fiend 
“Apep. Hail, praise be unto thee, O thou who art 
“as Ra who maketh himself to come into being (10) in 
“the form of the god Khepera. Hail, praise be unto 
“thee, O thou who art as Ra, for [he] hath destroyed 
“his enemies. Hail, praise be unto Ra, for he hath 
“crushed the heads of the children (11) of impotent 
“rebellion. And praise and rejoicing be unto the 
“Osiris Auf-ankh, triumphant.” 


RUBRIC: [This chapter] shall be recited over an Utchat 
of real lapis-lazuli or of mak stone plated with gold, before 
which shall be offered (12) every kind of fair and pure oblation 
when Ra showeth himself on the last day of the second month 
of the season pert. And thou shalt make another Utchat of 
jasper and place it upon such part of the dead man’s body as 
thou pleasest, and when this chapter hath been recited (13) 
before the boat of Ra, the deceased shall be borne along with 
these gods, and he shall become one of them, and he shall be 
made to rise up in the underworld. And whilst this chapter is 
being recited, and likewise whilst the offerings are being made 


428 THE BOOK OF THE FULL UTCHAT  [(Ch. exit, exlu. 


(14) at the time when the U/chat is full, four altars shall be 
lighted for Ra-Tem, and four for the Utchat, and four for the 
gods who have been mentioned. And upon each one of them 
shall there be bread-cakes made of fine flour, and five white 
cakes, and plants (?), and five white cakes, and shai, and five 
baag, and of incense one measure, and of {eq incense one 
measure, and one roasted joint of meat. 


CHAPTERS CXLI. ann CXLIL. 
[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 15). ] 


Vignette: The deceased, with hands raised in adoration, 
bowing before a table of offerings of every kind; or, the 
deceased standing and offering incense and pouring out a 
libation before Osiris; or, the god Osiris seated within a shrine 
on a throne, by the side of which stand Isis and Nephthys. 
On a lotus flower stand the four Children of Horus, and on a 
standard is a jackal, emblematic of Anubis. These vignettes 
are figured by Naville (op. cit., Bd. I. Bl. 153), and differ entirely 
from the vignette which accompanies Chapter CXLII. in the 
Saite Recension (see Lepsius, op. c?t., Bl. 59), Originally the 
text of Chapters CXLL. and CXLII. formed one composition, 
but it might readily be divided into two sections, viz., the list 
of the gods to whom a man was directed to make offerings for 
the benefit of his father and his son, and a list of the names of 
Osiris, and this is what the Editors of the Saite Recension 
actually did, and they emphasized the division by giving to 
each section a distinct title. 


Ch. cxli., cxlii.rr] OF MAKING A MAN PERFECT 429 


Text; [HERE BEGINNETH] THE Book! [wHIcH] A 
MAN SHALL RECITE FOR HIS FATHER OR FOR HIS SON 
DURING THE FESTIVALS oF AMENTET, WHEREBY HE 
SHALL MAKE HIM PERFECT WITH RA AND WITH THE 
GODS, AND WHEREBY HE SHALL HAVE HIS EXISTENCE 
WITH THEM; IT SHALL BE RECITED ON THE NINTH 
DAY OF THE FESTIVAL. Behold the Osiris Nu, the 
overseer of the house of the overseer of the seal, 
triumphant, maketh offerings of cakes, and ale, and 
oxen, and feathered fowl, and joints of roast meat; 
and he burneth incense 


1. to Osiris, the governor of Amenti,” 
2. to Ra-Heru-khuti (Ra-Harmachis),’ 
3. to Nu;* 
4. to Maat, 
5. to the Boat of Ra, 
6. to Temu,’ 
7. to the Great company of the gods, 
8. to the Little company of the gods, 
9. to Horus, the lord of the wreret crown, 
10. to Shu, 
11. to Tefnut, 


1 Tn the Saite Recension the title of the first section runs :— 
‘* {T[gRE BEGINNETH |] THE BOOK OF MAKING PERFECT THE DECEASED, 
‘SAND OF KNOWING THE NAMES OF THE GODS OF THE SOUTHERN 
‘©AND NORTHERN HEAVENS, AND OF THE GODS OF THE QERTI, AND 
‘OR THE GODS WHO ARE THE GUIDES OF THE UNDERWORLD (7UA7), 


‘Tt SHALL BE RECITED BY A MAN FOR HIS FATHER OR FOR HIS ° 


‘““MOTHER,” etc. 


2-'The S. R. (ie., Saite Recension) adds, ‘‘lord of the four 
districts of Abtu (Abydos).” % 8. R., Heru-khuti. 4 The S. R. 
adds, ‘‘ Father of the gods.” ° S. R., Tem-Khepera, 


430 OF MAKING A MAN PERFECT [Ch, exii., exlii. 12 


12. to Seb,! 

13. to Nut? 

14. to Isis, 

15. to Nephthys,” 

16. to the Temple of the Kas of Nebt-er-tcher, 

17. to the Raging-one-of-heaven-who-raiseth-up-the 
god, 

18. to Aukert * -dwelling-in-her-place, 

19. to the city of Meht-Khebitet, the saw of the god, 

20. to the Goddess-greatly-beloved-with-red-hair, 

21. to the Goddess-joined-unto-life-with-flowing-hair, 

22. to the Goddess-whose-name-is-mighty-in-her- 
works, 

23. to the Bull, the husband of the divine Cow,' 

24. to the beautiful Power of the beautiful Rudder 
of the northern heaven,* 

25. to Him that revolveth, the guide of the two 
lands, the beautiful Rudder of the western heaven,® 

26. to the God of light, who dwelleth in the Temple 
of the dshemu’ beings, the beautiful Rudder of the 
eastern heaven, 

27. to the Dweller in the Temple of the ruddy ones, 
the beautiful Rudder of the southern heaven,* 


1 In the 8. R. Seb and Nut are mentioned together. ” In the 
S. R. Osiris, Isis, and Nephthys are mentioned together. * In the 
S. R., Amenti. ‘4 In the 8S. R., ‘‘To the Bull of the Cows.” 
> Inthe S. R., ‘‘To the beautiful Power, the Opener of the Disk. 
To the beautiful Rudder of the northern heaven.” © In the S. R., 
‘““To Him that revolveth, the guide of the two lands. To the 
beautiful Rudder of the eastern heaven.” 7 J.e., the gods in 
material forms. % In the 8, R. this paragraph is in two sections. 


Ch. cxli., cxlii. 48] OF MAKING A MAN PERFECT 431 


28. To Mesthi, 

29. to Hapi, 

30. to Tuamautef, 

31. to Qebhsennuf;! 

32. to the Atert of the South, 

33. to the Atert of the North, 

34. to the Sektet boat,? 

35. to the Atet boat,’ 

36. to Thoth,! 

37. to the Gods of the South, 

38. to the Gods of the North,’ 

39. to the Gods of the West, 

40. to the Gods of the East,° 

41. to the Gods of the Thigh, 

42. to the Gods of the funeral offerings,” 
43. to the Great House, 

44, to the Temple of Flame,* 

45. to the Gods of the places of the dead, 
46. to the Gods of the horizon,’ 

A7. to the Gods of the fields, 

48. to the Gods of the divine Perti," 


1 In the S. R. the four ‘‘ children of Horus” are mentioned to- 
gether. 7 Inthe S. R. the two boats of the Sun are mentioned 
together. * After ‘‘Atet boat,” the S. R. adds, ‘‘to Hathor.” 
4 In the S.R., ‘To Thoth, the Bull of Maat, to Thoth, the Weigher 
of the words of the Company of the gods, to Thoth, the Guide of 
the gods. ° In the 8. R. the gods of the South and North are 
mentioned together. ° In the 8. R. the gods of the West and 
East are mentioned together. ‘ This line is omitted in the S. R. 
8 In the S. R. the ‘‘Great Double-House,” and the ‘‘ Double- 
House of Flame” are mentioned together. In the S. R. the 
gods of the cemeteries and of the horizon are mentioned together. 
10 In the S. R. the gods of the fields and of the Qerti (not Pert?) 
are mentioned together. 


432 OF MAKING A MAN PERFECT _ [Ch. exli,, exlii. 49 


49. to the Gods of the divine Nesti,) 

50. to the Roads of the South, 

51. to the Roads of the North,? 

52. to the Roads of the Kast, 

53. to the Roads of the West,’ 

54. to the Doors of the Underworld, 

55, to the Pylons of the Underworld, 

56. to the Leaves of the hidden doors, 

57. to the hidden doors, 

58. to the Guardians of the leaves of the Doors of 
the T'uat (Underworld),* 

59. to the Hidden Faces who guard the roads, 

60, to the Guardians who give divine food (?), 

G1. to the Guardians of the funeral mountains who 
vive happy faces (?), 

62. to the Flaming Beings who give forth fire, 

63. to the divine burning Altars, 

64. to those who scatter and extinguish the flame of 
fire in Amentet,° 


‘In the S. R., ‘‘little ones.” 2? In the S. R. the gods of the 
netches and the southern and northern roads are mentioned to- 
gether. * In the 8. R. the roads of the West and East are 
mentioned together. +4 In the 8. R. we have :—‘‘ To the Guide of 
the doors of “the Tuat, to the Doorkeepers of the Tuat and of the 
pylons of the Tuat, to the hidden pylons of the Tuat, to the Door- 
keepers of the py lons of the Tuat, to the hidden doors of the Tuat.” 
° In the S. R. we have :—‘‘ To those that scatter and extinguish 
the fire, to the fire in Amentet,”’ and after these lines are added 
the following :— 


“To Him that giveth triumph to the Kha, 
‘*To the Perfect one in Amentet, 
“To the East (Abtet) and to its Ka.” 


Ch. exli., cxlii. 89] OF MAKING A MAN PERFECT 433 


65. to Osiris-Un-nefer,! 

66. to Osiris-Ankhti, 

. to Osiris-lord-of-life, 

68. to Osiris-lord-of-wholeness, 
69, to Osiris-dweller-in-Peku (?), 
70. to Osiris-Orion (Sah), 

71. to Osiris-Saa, 

72. to Osiris-dweller-in-temples, 
73. to Osiris-in-Resenet, 

4. to Osiris-in-Mehenet, 

75. to Osiris-golden-one-of-millions-of-years, 
76, to Osiris-Bati-erpit, 

77. to Osiris-Ptah-lord-of-life, 
78. to Osiris-dweller-in-Re-stau, 
79. to Osiris-dweller-in-the-funeral-mountain, 
80. to Osiris-in-Ati, 

81. to Osiris-in-Sehtet, 

82. to Osiris-in-Netchefet, 

83. to Osiris-in-Resu, 

84. to Osiris-in-Pe, 

85. to Osiris-in-Neteru, 

86. to Osiris-in-Sau-the-Lower, 
87. to Osiris-in-Baket, 

88. to Osiris-in-Sunnu, 

89. to Osiris-in-Rehenenet, 


! In the §. R. here begins Chapter CXLII. with the title, ‘‘ The 
“Book of making perfect the deceased, and of making [him] to 
‘‘advance with long strides, and to come forth by day in all the 
‘transformations which he pleaseth, and to know the names of the 
‘god Osiris in every place wherein he chooseth to be.” 


VODs LE, P 


OF MAKING A MAN PERFECT [Ch. exli., exlii. 90 


. to Osiris-in-Apen, 
.. to Osiris-in-Qefennu, 


to Osiris-Sekri-in-Pet-she, 
to Osiris-dweller-in-his-city, 


. to Osiris-in-Pesk-re, 


to Osiris -in - his - habitations-in-the-Land-of-the- 


). to Osiris-in-heaven, 

. to Osiris-in-his-habitations-in-Re-stau, 
. to Osiris-Netchesti, 

. to Osiris-Atef-ur, 

. to Osiris-Sekri, 


to Osiris-governor-of-eternity, 


. to Osiris-the-begetter, 


to Osiris-in-the-water (?), 

to Osiris-in-battle (?), 

to Osiris-lord-of-everlastingness, 

to Osiris-Prince, 

to Osiris-Taiti, 

to Osiris-in-Re-stau, 

to Osiris-upon-his-sand, 

to Osiris-dweller-in-the-hall-of-the-Cow, 
to Osiris-in-Tanenet, 

to Osiris-in-Netebit, 


. to Osiris-in-Saa, 
. to Osiris-in-Beteshu, 
5, to Osiris-in-Tepu, 


to Osiris-in-Sau-the-Upper, 


. to Osiris-in-Nepert, 


Ch. exlii. § 1] OF PERFECTING THE SPIRIT 435 


118. to Osiris-in-Shennu, 
119. to Osiris-in-Henket, 
120. to Osiris-in-Ta-sekri, 
121. to Osiris-in-Shau, 
122. to Osiris-in-Fat-Heru, 
123. to Osiris-in-Maati, 
124, to Osiris-in-Hena. 


In the Saite Recension (see Lepsius, op. cit., Bl. 59) 
Chapter CXLII. is much fuller than in the papyri 
extant which contain the Theban Recension; as there 
given it is in a tabular form and is divided into six 
sections each containing twenty-six lines. It runs :— _ 


Text: THe Book OF MAKING PERFECT THE DE- 
CEASED AND OF MAKING HIM TO ADVANCE WITH LONG 
STRIDES, AND TO COME FORTH BY DAY IN ALL THE 
TRANSFORMATIONS WHICH PLEASE HIM, AND TO KNOW 
THE NAMES OF THE GOD OSIRIS IN EVERY PLACE 
WHEREIN HE CHOOsETH TO BE. The Osiris Auf-ankh, 
born of Sheret-Amsu, triumphant, saith :— 

I. (1) “ Osiris-un-nefer, (2) Osiris-the-living-one, (3) 
“ Osiris-lord-of-life, (4) Osiris-Neb-er-tcher, (5) Osiris- 
“ opener-of-the-back-of-the-two-lands, (6) Osiris-dweller- 
“in-Un, (7) Osiris-dweller-in-corn, (8) Osiris-Sah 
“(Orion), (9) Osiris-holy-crown-of-the-Souls-of-Annu 
“ (Heliopolis), (10) Osiris-dweller-in-Thenenet, (11) 
“ Osiris-in-Resenet, (12) Osiris-in-Mehenet, (13) Osiris- 
“ Jord-of-millions-of-years, (14) Osiris-son-of-the-Hrpeti 
“(ie., Isis and Nephthys), (15) Osiris-Ptah-lord-of-life, 


436 OF PERFECTING THE.SPIRIT  ([Chicxit$ 253 


“ (16) Osiris-dweller-in-Re-stau, (17) Osiris-governor-of- 
“the-world-dwelling-in-Tattu, (18) Osiris-dweller-in- 
‘the-funeral-mountain, (19) Osiris-holy-Soul-in-Tattu, 
(20) Osiris-in-Ati (?), (21) Osiris-in-Heset,” or as 
others say, “in Neter-seh, (22) Osiris-lord-of-Ta-ankhtet 
“(ie Land of Life), (23) Osiris-in-Sau (Sais), (24) 
“ Osiris-in-Netchet, (25) Osiris-in-the-South,” or as 
others say, “among-the-divine-sovereign-chiefs, (26) 
“ Osiris-in-Pe.” 


II, ‘(1) Osiris-in-Tept, (2) Osiris-in-Netra, (3) 
“Osiris-in-Lower-Sau (Sais), (4) Osiris-in-Upper-Sau 
“ (Sais), (5) Osiris-in-An-rut-f, (6) Osiris-in-the-two- 
‘“hawk-gods, (7) Osiris-in-Sunnu, (8) Osiris-in-Renen, 
« (9) Osiris-in-Aper, (10) Osiris-in-Qenfennu, (11) 
“ Osiris-in-Sekri, (12) Osiris-in-Petet, (13) Osiris-in- 
“his-temple-in-Re-stau, (14) Osiris-in-Nif-ur, (15) 
“Osiris in-Netit, (16) Osiris-dweller-in-his-city, (17) 
‘“Osiris-Henti (7.c., Osiris of the two crocodiles), (18) 
“ Osiris-in-Pekes, (19) Osiris-in-his-temple-in-the-Land- 
“ of-the-South, (20) Osiris-in-his-temple-in-the-Land-of- 
‘‘the-North, (21) Osiris-in-heaven, (22) Osiris-on-earth, 
(23) Osiris-upon-[his-|throne, (24) Osiris-in-Atef-ur, 
(25) Osiris-Seker-in-the-closed-chest, (26) Osiris- 
“ prince-of-eternity-in- Annu.” 


III. (1) “ Osiris-the-begetter, (2) Osiris-in-the-Sek- 
‘tet-boat, (8) Osiris-in-Rertu-nifu, (4) Osiris-lord-of- 
“eternity, (5) Osiris-lord-of-everlastingness, (6) Osiris- 
“in-Tesher, (7) Osiris-in-Seshet, (8) Osiris-in-Ut-reset, 


Ch, exlii. §3,4,5] OF PERFECTING THE SPIRIT 437 


“(9) Osiris-in-Ut-meht, (10) Osiris-in-Aat-utt, (11) 
Osiris-in-A pert, (12) Osiris-in-Shennu, (13) Osiris-in- 
“ e-kennut,” or as others say, “in-Iesert, (14) Osiris- 
“in-Seker, (15) Osiris-in-Shau, (16) Osiris-fa-Heru, 
“(17) Osiris-in-Uu-pek, (18) Osiris-in-Maati, (19) 
‘Osiris-in-Mena, (20) Osiris-Souls-of-his-father, (21) 
“ Osiris-lord-of-the-world-king-of-the-gods, (22) Osiris- 
‘“in-Bener, (23) Osiris-Tai, (24) Osiris-on-his-sand, (25) 
“ Osiris-dweller-in-the-hall-of-his-Cows, (26) Osiris-in- 
«ga» 


IV. (1) “Osiris-in-Sapti, (2) Osiris-in-Asher, (3) 
“ Osiris-in-all-lands, (4) Osiris-dweller-in-the-pool-of- 
“the-Great-double-House, (5) Osiris-in-Het-benbenet, 
“ (6) Osiris-in-Annu, (7) Osiris-the-aged-Chief-in-Annu, 
“ (8) Osiris-in-Hemak, (9) Osiris-in-Akesh, (10) Osiris- 
“jn-Pe-of-Nu, (11) Osiris-in-the-Great-Temple, (12) 
“ Osiris-lord-of-life-in-A btu, (13) Osiris-lord-of-Tattu, 
(14) Osiris-dweller-in-the-throne-of-his-habitations (?), 
“(15) Osiris-Prince-in-Abtu, (16) Osiris-Prince-in-the- 
“hidden-place, (17) Osiris-in-life-in-Het-ka-Ptah, (18) 
“ Osiris-lord-of-might-destroyer-of-the-foe, (19) Osiris- 
“ Bull-in-Qemt, (20) Osiris-aheti, (21) Osiris-seh, (22) 
“ Osiris-Heru-khuti, (25) Tem-Bull-of-the-body-of-the- 
“ Great-Company-of-the-gods, (24) Opener-of-the-roads- 
“ of-the-south-governor-of-the-two-lands, (25) Opener- 
“ of- the -roads - of- the - north - governor - of- heaven, (26) 
“ Ptah-stablisher-of-the-holy-seat-of-Ra.” 


V, (1) “One-invoked (?)-in-Het-benbenet, (2) Seb- 


438 OF PERFECTING THE SPIRIT  [Ch. exlii. §5,6 


“prince-of-the-gods, (8) Heru-ur, (4) Heru-khentet- 
“an-maati, -(5) Heru-sa-Auset, (6) Amsu-suten-Heru- 
“nekht, (7) An-mut-f-ab-ur, (8) Khnemu-Heru-hetep, 
“ (9) Heru-sekhai, (10) Heru-khent-Khatthi, (11) Heru- 
“Tehuti, (12) An-Heru, (13) Anpu-khent-neter-seh, 
“ (14) Nut, (15) Isis-goddess-in-all-her-names, (16) Re- 
“sekhait, (17) Shenthit, (18) Heqtit, (19) Neshemet- 
“ Boat-lord-of-eternity, (20) Nit (Neith)-Serqet, (21) 
“Maat, (22) Ahit, (23) The-four-birth-places-in-Abtu, 
“(24) Great-Meskhen, (25) Meskhen-Seqebet, (26) 
“ Meskhen-Menkhet.” 


VI. (1) “Meskhen-nefert, (2) Amseth, (8) Hapi, (4) 
“Tuamautef, (5) Qebhsennuf, (6) Uraeus-within-the- 
‘‘ Divine-House, (7) Gods-guides-of-the-Tuat, (8) Gods- 
“of-the-Qerti, (9) Gods-goddess-within-Abtu, (10) 
“ Shrines-North-South, (11) Devoted-ones-of-Osiris, 
“(12) Osiris-dweller-in-Amentet, (13) Osiris-in-his- 
“every-place, (14) Osiris-in-his-place-in-the-Land-of- 
“the-South, (15)  Osiris-in-his-place-in-the-Land-of- 
“the-North, (16) Osiris-in-every-place-where-his-Ka- 
“wisheth-to-be, (17) Osiris-in-all-his-halls, (18) Osiris- 
“in-all-his-creations, (19) Osiris-in-all-his-names, (20) 
“* Osiris-in-all-his-holdings, (21) Osiris-in-all-his-risings, 
(22) Osiris-in-all-his-ornamentations, (23) Osiris- 
“in-all-his-stations, (24) Heru-netch-tef-f-in-his- 
“every-name, (25) Anpu-dweller-in-the - seh -hall-in- 
“his-every-name, (26) Anpu-in-the-town-of-embalm- 
“nent % 2 sees eee x 


Chap. exliii. | VIGNETTES 


CHAPTER CXLIII. 


Chapter CXLIII. consists of 
the Vignette to Chapter CXLIL. 
(see Lepsius, op. ci., Pl. 59) 
which is found in the Saite 
Recension only. This Vignette is 
divided into five sections :— (1) A 
standing upright with 
pendent arms. (2) The hawk of 
Horus upon a standard placed in 
a boat. (8) A man, with his left 
hand raised as if in invocation, 


woman 


standing in a boat; before him 
are two disks, one of the sun, 
and the other of the moon, 
(4) The Sektet boat wherein are 
the two divine hawks of Ra and 
(5) A 


standing 


Osiris upon standards. 
man (the deceased ’) 
upright with both hands raised 
in adoration. 


439 


rA\ 
[Al ——— | 
IAATUCETAAAEA VAAN TAA 


fos 
iii 


van 


i} 
ay 


TA MM MTT 


440 CHAPTER OF THE ARITS [Chap. cxliv, 


CHAPTER CXLIV. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 26). ] 


Vignette : (1) Ani and his wife adoring the gods of the Arits; 
(2) the seven Arits (or mansions).! 


Text: (1) [THe CHAPTER OF ENTERING IN. The 
Osiris Nu, triumphant saith :—]° 


I. “Tur rrrst Artr. Sekhet-hra-asht-aru is the 
“name of the doorkeeper of the first Arit, Semetu is 


' In many papyri two gods, each holding a knife, are seated 
before each door; one is the herald and the other the watcher. 
Each door is usually numbered. See Naville, op. cit., Bd. I. 
Bl. 154. In the vignette here given from the Papyrus of Nu three 
gods guard each Arit. 

2 The title of this Chapter is taken from the Brocklehurst 
Papyrus (ibid.). In the Saite Recension it is called “The knowing 
of the names of the Arits,” 


441 


CHAPTER OF THE ARITS 


Chap. cxliv. | 


‘SpOS URIPIVUS TY} TA SJIY UdASG oI, 


NYANYAAYALUARVANARVENYA YAY AVANT ENYD 
7 NGA; | : 

ae 

| | | | LL 

‘ . i. | | 


Chap. exliv.] CHAPTER OF THE ARITS 443 


“the name of the watcher, and Hu-kheru is the name 
“of the herald thereof.” 

Il. “THe second Artr. Tun-hat is the name of 
“the doorkeeper of the second Arit, Se-qet-hra is the 
“name of the watcher, and Sabes is the name of the 
“herald thereof.” 

Ill. “Tue ramp Arrr. Am-huat-ent-peh-fi is the 
‘“‘name of the doorkeeper of the third Arit, Res-hra is 
“the name of the watcher, and Udau is the name of the 
“herald thereof.” 

IV. “THe rourtH Artr. Khesef-hra-asht-kheru is 
“the name of the doorkeeper of the fourth Arit, Res-ab 
“is the name of the watcher, and Neteka-hra-khesef-atu 
“is the name of the herald thereof.” . 

V. “Tae rrero Anrr. Ankh-em-fentu is the name 
“‘of the doorkeeper of the fourth Arit, Ashebu is the 
“name of the watcher, and Teb-her-kehaat is the name 
“ of the herald thereof.” 

VI. “Tue srxru Artr. Aken-tau-k-ha-kheru is the 
“name of the doorkeeper of the sixth Arit, An-hra is 
“the name of the watcher, and Metes-hra-ari-she is 
“the name of the herald thereof.” 

VII. “Tue seventu Arr. Metes-sen is the name 
“of the doorkeeper of the seventh Arit, Aaa-kheru is 
“the name of the watcher, and Khesef-hra-khemiu is 
“the name of the herald thereof.” 

(1) “ Hail,’ ye Arits! Hail, ye who make the Arits 


! A yersion of this portion of Chapter CXLIV. is found in 
Lepsius, op. cit., Bll. 60, 61. 


444 CHAPTER OF THE ARITS [Chap. cxliv. 2 


“for Osiris! Hail, ye who watch your Arits! Hail, 
“ve who herald the affairs of the (2) two lands for the 
“ood Osiris each day, the Osiris Nu, the overseer of 
“the house of the overseer of the seal, triumphant, 
“|noweth you, and he knoweth your names. ‘The 
“Osiris Nu hath been born in Re-stau, (3) and every 
“olory of the horizon [and] every honour have been 
“siven unto him. The Osiris Nu is in the city of 
“Pe like the pure being (?) Osiris. The Osiris Nu 
“hath received acclamations in Re-stau, and (4) the 
‘“‘oods lead [him] over the horizon along with the 
“divine princes who are behind Osiris. I am the 
“divine One among them, and [I am] their leader. 
“The Osiris Nu (5) is a Khu, the lord of the Khus, a 
“ Khu [who] worketh. The Osiris Nu celebrateth the 
“monthly festival and he is the herald of the half- 
“monthly festival. Hail, thou that revolvest, the 
“Osiris Nu (6) is under the fiery Eye of Horus, and 
“he is under the hand of Thoth on the night when he 
‘“travelleth over heaven in triumph. The Osiris Nu 
“passeth onwards in peace, and he journeyeth (7) in 
“the boat of Ra. The strength which protecteth the 
“Osiris Nu is the strength which protecteth the boat 
‘of Ra. The: Osiris Nu (8) hath a name greater than 
“yours, and he is greater than ye are on the path of 
“Maat; the Osiris abominateth defeat (?). The strength 
“which protecteth the Osiris Nu is (9) the strength 
‘which protecteth Horus the first-born of Ra. [He] 
hath made his heart, and the Osiris Nu shall not be 


Chap. cxliv, 18 } CHAPTER OF THE ARITS AA5 


“constrained and he shall not be repulsed at the Arits 
“of the god Osiris. (10) The Osiris Nu hath been 
“provided [with all things] by the double Lion-god, 
“and the pure one (?) is in the following of Osiris, the 
“oovernor of Amenti, throughout the course of each 
“day, daily. (11) His fields are in Sekhti-hetep with 
“the divine beings who know things, and with those 
“who perform things for the Osiris Nu (12) by the 
“hand of Thoth among those who make offerings of 
“propitiation, And Anubis hath commanded him that 
“dwelleth among offerings that the offerings of the 
“Osiris Nu shall be with him, and that they shall 
“not be taken away (13) from him by those divine 
“beings who dwell in fetters. The Osiris Nu, the 
“overseer of the house of the overseer of the seal, 
“triumphant, cometh like unto Horus in the splen- 
“dour of the horizon of heaven, and Ra hath set him 
“in order (14) for the Arits of the horizon; the gods 
“rejoice in him when they meet him. The amulets (?) 
“of the god are for (15) the Osiris Nu, the god Nebt 
“shall not come to him, and the doorkeepers of the 
“ Arits shall not overthrow him. The Osiris Nu (16) 
“is hidden of face within the great celestial house 
“Twhich is] the shrine of the god, and he arriveth 
“there in the following of the pure one (?) Hathor. 
“The Osiris Nu (17) createth multitudes of human 
“beings, he maketh Maat to advance to Ra, and he 
“ destroyeth the twofold strength of Apep. The Osiris 
“Nu (18) maketh a way through the firmament, he 


446 CHAPTER OF THE ARITS [Chap. cxliv. 19 


“driveth away the whirlwind and the storm, he maketh 
“the mariners of Ra to live, and he maketh offerings 
“to come unto the place where he (?) is. (19) The 
“QOsiris Nu causeth a boat to be made, he travelleth 
“therein happily ; the Osiris Nu maketh a way and he 
‘“advanceth thereon. The face of the Osiris Nu (20) 
“is like that of the god Ur-pehi-f by reason of the 
“might (?), and the Osiris Nu is the lord of might. 
“The Osiris Nu is at rest in the horizon, and he is 
(21) valiant to overthrow you, O ye Neheswu gods ; 
“make a path, then, for your lord Osiris.” 


RUBRIC: This chapter shall be said over a drawing of the 
divine sovereign chiefs, which hath been done in yellow ink, 
(22) on the boat of Ra; and offerings and oblations shall be 
made unto them, and sacrifices of feathered fowl, and incense 
[shall be burnt] before them. These acts will make the-de- 
ceased to live, and they will give him strength among (23) 
these gods, and he shall neither be repulsed nor turned back 
at the pylons of the underworld. And, moreover, thou shalt 
make a figure of the deceased in their presence, and thou shalt 
make it to come forth towards every one of (24) these gates 
which are painted [above]. And thou shalt recite this chapter 
at the door of each of the Arits which are painted [above], 
and at each one of them thou shalt make offerings, viz., the 
thigh, the head, the heart, and the hoof of a red bull; (25) and 
four vessels of blood which hath not come from the breast ; 
and amulets (?); and sixteen loaves of white bread, and eight 
pasen (or persen) loaves, and eight shenen loaves, and eight 
khenfu loaves, and eight hebennw loaves, and eight large vessels 
of beer, and (26) [eight] large vessels of grain; and four earth- 
enware vessels filled with the milk of a white cow, and fresh 
herbs, and fresh olives, and unguent, and eye-paint, and hatet 
(27) unguent, and incense [to be burnt] on the fire, and [this 
chapter] shall be recited twice over each earthenware vessel, 
after the drawing (07 image) hath been made, at the fourth 


Chap. cxlv.] CHAPTER OF THE ARITS 447 


hour, going round about by day; (28) and take good heed to 
the time in the heavens. Now when thou doest [what is 
written in] this book do not allow any person whatsoever to 
see [thee]. [And this ceremony] shall make long the strides 
(29) of the deceased in heaven, and on earth, and in the under- 
world, and it shall benefit him in everything which he doeth, 
and he shall [possess] the things of the day regularly and 
continually. 


CHAPTER CXLY. 
{From Lepsius, Todtenbuch, Bll. 61—65. ] 


Chapter CXLYV. and CXLVI. are two versions of one 
and the same text. Of these, Chapter CXLY. is the 
longer, and the two different forms of it—of each of 
which, unfortunately, only a single imperfect copy is 
extant—are described by Naville (Linleitung, pp. 111 
and 173—176). Both are ancient, one appearing in 
the tomb of Seti II. Meri-en-Ptah at Thebes, and the 
other in the papyrus of the royal military scribe Pa-ur 
(Hinlettung, p. 104). <A better general view of the 
contents of Chapter CXLY. will probably be obtained 
from the text as given in the Saite Recension than 
from the mutilated ancient forms now known; it is, 
moreover, fuller than the others, and the following 
translation has been made from it. 


Vignette: The twenty-one pylons of Sekhet-Aanre of the 

House of Osiris. In each section the deceased stands with 

hands raised in adoration before a god who stands by the side 
of a shrine. 


448 THE CHAPTERS OF THE PYLONS  [Chap. exlv. 


Text: [Here BEGIN THE CHAPTERS OF| THE 
PYLONS or Sexuet-AANRE oF THE Hous or Osiris. 
(1) The Osiris Auf-ankh, triumphant, saith :— 

I. “ Homage to thee, saith Horus, O thou first pylon 
“of the Still-Heart. I have made [my] way. I know 
“thee, and I know thy name, 
“and I know (2) the name 
“of the god who guardeth 
“thee! ‘Lady of trem- 
“)lings, with lofty walls, 
“the sovereign lady, the 
“mistress of destruction, 


“who setteth in order the 
“words which drive back 
“the whirlwind and the storm, who delivereth from 
“destruction him that travelleth along the way,’ is thy 
“name. (3) The name of the god who guardeth thee 
“is Nerau. Ihave washed myself in the water wherein 
“the god Ra washeth himself when he leaveth the 
“eastern part of the sky. I have anointed myself 
“(4) with Adti unguent [made from] the cedar, I 
“have arrayed myself in apparel of menkh, and I 
“have with me my sceptre of heti wood.” 

[Saith the pylon :—] “ Pass on, then, thou art pure.” 

II. (5) “The Osiris Auf-ankh, triumphant, saith :— 

“Homage to thee, saith Horus, O thou second pylon 
‘of the Still-Heart. I have made [my] way. I know 
“thee, and I know thy name, and I know (6) the name 
“of the god who guardeth thee. ‘ Lady of heaven, the 


Chap. cxlv. ] OF THE HOUSE OF OSIRIS 449 


“mistress of the world, who terrifieth the earth from 
“the place of [thy] body,’ is thy name. The name of 
“the god who guardeth thee 
“is Mes-Ptah. I have washed 
“myself in the water wherein 
“the god Osiris (7) washeth 
“himself, to whom were given 
“the Sektet boat and the Ma- 
“tet boat when he came forth 


“over Am-urt, and passed 
“through the pylons. I have 
“anointed myself with the unguent of the festivals, 
“(8) I have arrayed myself in apparel of seshef, and I 
“have with me my sceptre of benben wood.” 

[Saith the pylon :—] ‘‘ Pass on, then, thou art pure.” 

III. (9) The Osiris Auf-ankh, triumphant, saith :— 

“Homage to thee, saith Horus, O thou third pylon 
“of the Still-Heart, I have made [my] way. I know 
“thee, and I know thy 
“name, and I know the 
“name of the god (10) who 
“ouardeth thee. ‘Lady of 
“pylons, lady to whom 
“abundant offerings are 
“made, who giveth what- 


“soever is there, (?) the 

“ouide of the offerings, 

“who gratifieth the gods, who giveth the day for the 

“sailing up of the boat Neshemet to Abtu (Abydos),’ is 
VOL. II, Q 


450 THE CHAPTERS OF THE PYLONS (Chap. cxlv. 


“thy name. (11) The name of the god who guardeth 
“thee is Beq. I have washed myself in the water 
“wherein the god Ptah washeth when he saileth up 
“to carry away the god Hennu on the day of ‘opening 
“the face.” I have anointed (12) myself with Adti 
“unguent [made] of hekennu unguent and of taken 
“uneuent, [ have arrayed myself in apparel of shesa, 
“and I have with me my sceptre of dhen (?) wood,” 
[Saith the pylon :—] “Pass on, then, thou art pure.” 
IV. (18) The Osiris Auf-ankh, triumphant, saith :— 
‘“ Homage to thee, saith Horus, O thou fourth pylon 
“of the Still-Heart. I have made [my] way. I know 
“thee, and I know thy 
“name, and I knew the 
“name of the god (14) who 
“ouardeth thee. ‘She who 
“ prevaileth with knives, the 
“mistress of the two lands, 
“who destroyeth the ene- 
“mies of the Still-Heart, 
“who maketh the decree 
“for the escape of the needy from evil hap,’ is thy 
“name, The name of the god who guardeth thee is 
“}Tu-tepa. (15) I have washed myself in the water 
“wherein the god Un-nefer, triumphant, washeth him- 
“self, when he hath had a dispute with Set, and when 
“victory is given unto him. I have anointed myself 
“(16) with sundt unguent and with even unguent, I 
“am pure (?), I have arrayed myself in shesdé apparel 


Chap. cxlv.] OF THE HOUSE OF OSIRIS A51I 


“like unto that in which thy son [was arrayed], 
Eee and I have with me my sceptre of tau- 
“atutw wood,” 

[Saith the pylon :]|— “ Pass on, then, thou art pure.” 

V. (17) The Osiris Auf-ankh, triumphant, saith :— 

“Homage to thee, saith Horus, O thou fifth pylon of 
“the Still-Heart. I have made [my] way. I know 
“thee, and I know thy 
‘name, | know the name 
“of the god who (18) 
“ouardeth thee. ‘Lady of 
“splendour, lady of praises, 
“lofty one, Neb-er-tchert, 
“the lady to whom suppli- 
“cations are made and 


“unto whom none en- 
SSterethe. 6 os ees 0" >is thy name. The name of 
“the god who guardeth thee is Krta-hen-er-requa. 
“(19) I have washed myself in the water wherein 
“Horus washed himself when he made himself the 
“Chief Reader and Sa-mer-f for his father Osiris. I 
“have anointed myself with aber unguent [made] of 
“holy offerings, I have upon me the (20) skin of the 
“panther, and I have with me my sceptre wherewith 
“to smite those who are black of heart.” 

[Saith the pylon :—] “ Pass on, then, thou art pure.” 

VI. (21) The Osiris Auf-ankh, triumphant, saith :— 

‘“‘ Homage to thee, saith Horus, O thou sixth pylon 
“of the Still-Heart. Ihave made [my] way. I know 


452 THE CHAPTERS OF THE PYLONS (Chap. cxlv. 


“thee, and I know thy name, and I know the name 
“of the god who guardeth thee (22)........ , ‘lady 
“to whom abundant sup- 
“plication is made....; 
“the difference between 
“whose height and breadth 
‘is unknown; the like of 
“whom for strength hath 
“not been overturned (?) 
“since the beginning ; the 
“number of the serpents 
‘‘which are there upon their bellies is unknown; the 
“divine image, the strengthener (23) out of the night, 
‘being born in the presence of the Still-Heart,’ is thy 
“name, ‘The name of the god who guardeth thee is | 
“Samti. I have washed myself in the water wherein 
“the god Thoth washed himself when he made himself 
“the tchat of Horus. (24) I have anointed myself with 
“aka unguent, I have arrayed myself in apparel of 
“thesthes, and I have with me my sceptre of sept 
“wood.” 

[Saith the pylon :—] ‘Pass on, then, thou art pure.” 

VII. (25) The Osiris Auf-ankh, triumphant, saith :— 

“Homage to thee, saith Horus, O thou seventh 
‘pylon of the Still-Heart. I have made [my] way. 
‘“‘T know thee, and I know thy name, and I know 
“the name of the god who guardeth thee. (26) 
“«Waterflood which clotheth the feeble one, weeper 
“for that which she loveth, shrouding the body,’ is 


Chap. cxlv.] OF THE HOUSE OF OSIRIS 453 


“thy name. The name of the god who guardeth 
“thee ig Am-Nit. I have washed myself in the water 
“wherein (27) the goddesses 
“Tsis and Nephthys washed 
“themselves when they passed 
“the Crocodile with his croco- 
“diles on their way to the 
“opening of the place of 
“purity. I have anointed 


“myself with hekennu un- 
‘“‘onent, I have arrayed myself in (28) wnkh apparel, 
“and I have with me my sceptre and [my] paddle.” 
[Saith the pylon :—] “ Pass on, then, thou art pure.” 
VIII. (29) The Osiris Auf-ankh, triumphant, saith :— 
“ Homage to thee, saith Horus, O thou eighth pylon 
“of the Still-Heart. I have made |my] way. I know 
“thee, and I know thy name, and I know the name of 
“the god who guardeth thee (30), ‘She that belongeth 
“to her lord, the mighty 
“goddess, the gracious one, 
“the lady who giveth birth 
“to the divine form of her 
“lord,” or as others say, 
«who passeth through and 
“traverseth [the land], the 
“head [of which] is millions 
“of cubits in depth and in 
“height, is thy name. The name of the god who 
“ouardeth thee is Netchses, I have washed myself 


454 THE CHAPTERS OF THE PYLONS  [Chap. cxlv. 


“in the water wherein (31) the god Anpu washed when 
“he had performed the office of embalmer and bandager,” 
or as others say, “the Chief Reader of Osiris. (82) I 
‘have anointed myself with se/t unguent, I have arrayed 
“myself in apparel of a/md, and I have my garment (?) 
“of enen stuff,” or as others say, “of cat’s skin (?) with 
“me.” 

[Saith the pylon :—] “ Pass on, then, thou art pure.” 

IX. (83) The Osiris Auf-ankh, triumphant, saith : — 

“Homage to thee, saith Horus, O thou ninth pylon 
“of the Still-Heart. I have made [my] way. I know 
“thee, and I know thy name, 
“and I know the name of 
“the god who guardeth (34) 
“thee. ‘Blazing flame of 
“Horus which cannot be 
“extinguished; which hay- 
“ing passed is followed by 
“another; which is pro- 


“vided with tongues of 
“flame that project to destroy; irresistible and im- 
“passable [by any] by reason of the injury which it 
“doeth, is thy name. There is fear (55) through the 
“might of its roaring. The name of the god who 
“ouardeth thee is Khau-tchet-f. I have washed my- 
“self in the water wherein the Ram, Lord of Tattu, 
‘washed himself thoroughly from one end of his body 
“to the other. I have (86) anointed myself with dnt 
“aneuent of the divine members, and with dnkh 


Chap. exlv. ] OF THE HOUSE OF OSIRIS 455 


‘“uneuent, I have arrayed myself in a tunic of fair 
“white linen, and I have with me my sceptre of 
“ benen wood.” 

[Saith the pylon :—] ‘‘ Pass on, then, thou art pure.” 

X. (37) The Osiris Auf-ankh, triumphant, saith :— 

“Homage to thee, saith Horus, O thou tenth pylon 
“of the Still-Heart. I have made [my] way. I know 
“thee, and I know thy name 
“and I know the name of the 
“ood who guardeth (38) thee. 
“*Tiofty of gates, who raiseth 
“up those who cry (?), who 
“art terrible unto him that 
“would come unto thee,” or 


as others say, ‘‘‘She who 
“maketh one to make supplication, by reason of the 
‘loudness of her voice; vanquisher of the foe who is 
“not constrained by that which is within her,’ is thy 
(39) name. The name of the god who watcheth thee 
“is Sekhen-ur. I have washed myself in the water 
‘wherein the god Astes washed himself when he 
“entered in to be an advocate for Set within the 
“hidden chamber. (40) I have anointed myself with 
“teshen unguent, and I have with me a sceptre made 
“of the bone of the bird fesher, having a head like that 
“of a greyhound.” 

[Saith the pylon :—] “ Pass on, then, thou art pure.’ 

XI. (41) The Osiris Auf-ankh, triumphant, saith :— 

“Homage to thee, saith Horus, O thou eleventh 


, 


456 THE CHAPTERS OF THE PYLONS (Chap. eslv. 


‘pylon of the Still-Heart. I have made [my] way. I 
“know thee, and I know thy name, and (42) I know 
“the name of the being who is 
“within thee. ‘She who re- 
“peateth slaughters, who burneth 
“up the Fiends, the mistress of 
“every pylon, the lady to whom 
‘acclamation is made on the day 
(43) of hearing iniquity’ is thy 


“name, Thou hast the judgment 
“of the feeble bandaged one.” 
[Saith the pylon :—] “ Pass on, then, thou art pnre.” 
XII. (44) The Osiris Auf-ankh, triumphant, saith :— 
“Homage to thee, saith Horus, O thou twelfth 
“pylon of the Still-Heart. I have made [my] way. 
“T know thee, and I know thy 
“name, and I know the (45) 
“name of the being who is with- 
“in thee. ‘She who journeyeth 
“about in the two lands; who 
“destroyeth those who come with 
“ flashings and with fire, the lady 
‘of splendour; who hearkeneth 


“to the word of her lord every 

“day, is thy name. Thou hast the (46) judgment of 
‘the feeble bandaged one.” 

[Saith the pylon :—] “ Pass on, then, thou art pure.” 

XIII. (47) The Osiris Auf-ankh, triumphant, saith :— 

“Homage to thee, saith Horus, O thou thirteenth 


Chap. exlv. ] OF THE HOUSE OF OSIRIS 457 


“pylon of the Still-Heart. I have made [my] way. I 
“know thee, and I know (48) thy name, and I know 
“the name of the being who is 
“within thee. ‘When the com- 
“pany of the gods is led along 
“their hands are [raised in] 
“adoration before her face, and 
“the watery abyss shineth with 
“light by reason of those who 


“are therein, is thy name (49). 
“Thou hast the judgment of the feeble bandaged one.” 

[Saith the pylon :—] “ Pass on, then, thou art pure.” 

XIV. (50) The Osiris Auf-ankh, triumphant, saith :— 

“Homage to thee, saith Horus, O thou fourteenth 
“pylon of the Still-Heart. I have made [my] way. 
“T know thee, and I know thy 
“name, and I know (51) the 
“name of the beimg who is 
“within thee. ‘Mighty one of 
“Souls, red of hair, Aakhabit, 
“who cometh forth by night; 


“who destroyeth the Fiends in 
“their created forms which their 
“hands give to the Still-Heart (52) in his hour; the 
“one who cometh and goeth,’ is thy name. She hath 
“the judgment of the feeble bandaged one.” 
[Saith the pylon :—] ‘“‘ Pass on, then, thou art pure.” 
XV. (53) The Osiris Auf-ankh, triumphant, saith :— 
“Homage to thee, saith Horus, O thou fifteenth 


458 THE CHAPTERS OF THE PYLONS  ithapexiv. 


“pylon of the Still-Heart. I have made [my] way. 
“T know thee, and I know thy name, (54) and I 
“know the name of the being 
“who is within thee. ‘Lady 
“of valour, destroyer of the 
“ruddy ones, who celebrateth 
“the Heker festivals (?) [when] 
“the fire is extinguished on 
“the day of hearing [cases of | 


“iniquity, is thy name, (55) 
“She hath the judgment of the feeble bandaged one.” 
[Saith the pylon :—] “ Pass on, then, thou art pure.” 
XVI. (56) The Osiris Auf-ankh, triumphant, saith :— 
“Homage to thee, saith Horus, O thou sixteenth- 
“pylon of the Still-Heart. I have made [my] way. 
“T know thee, and I know thy 
“name, and I know the name 
“of the being who is (57) within 
“thee. ‘Lady of vietory, whose 
“hand goeth after the Fiends, 
“who burneth with flames of 


“fire when she cometh forth, 
“creator of the mysteries of the 
“earth, is thy name. She hath the judgment of the 
(58) feeble bandaged one.” 

[Saith the pylon :—] “ Pass on, then, thou art pure.” 

XVII. (59) The Osiris Auf-ankh, triumphant, 
saith :— 

“Homage to thee, saith Horus, O thou seventeenth 


Chap. exly. ] OF THE HOUSE OF OSIRIS 459 


“pylon of the Still-Heart. I have made [my] way. 
“T know thee, and I know thy name, and I know 
(60) the name of the being 
“who is within thee. ‘Mighty 
“one in the horizon, lady of the 
“ruddy ones, destroyer in blood, 
« \akhabit, Power, lady of flame,’ 
“is thy name. She hath the 
“judgment (61) of the feeble 
“Pbandaged one.” 

[Saith the pylon :—] “ Pass on, then, thou art pure.” 

XVIII. (62) The Osiris Auf-ankh, triumphant, 
“ saith :— 

‘‘Homage to thee, saith Horus, O thou eighteenth 
“pylon of the Still-Heart. I have made [my] way. 
“T know thee, and I know thy 
“name, and I know (63) the 
“name of the being who is 
“within thee. ‘Lover of flame, 
“pure one, hearkening unto the 
Omg ..coe 2 behold) [she] loveth 
“to cut off the head[s| of the 
“venerated ones, lady of the 
“Great House, destroyer (64) of Fiends at eventide,’ 
“lis thy name]. She hath the judgment of the feeble 
“bandaged one.” ; 

[Saith the pylon :—] “ Pass on, then, thou art pure.” 

XIX. (65) The Osiris Auf-ankh, triumphant, saith :— 

“Homage to thee, saith Horus, O thou nineteenth 


460 THE CHAPTERS OF THE PYLONS [Chaps cxlv. 


“pylon of the Still-Heart. I have made [my] way. 
““T know thee, and I know thy name, and I know 
(66) the name of the being who 
“is within thee. ‘Dispenser of 
“strength,’” or as others say, “ ‘of 
“light, of the palace (?), the mighty 
“one of the flame, the lady of the 


209 


“strength and of the writings of 
“Ptah himself, is thy name. 
“She hath the judgment of the 
“ (67) feeble bandaged one.” 
|Saith the pylon :—] “ Pass on, then, thou art pure.” 
XX. (68) The Osiris Auf-ankh, triumphant, saith :— 
“Homage to thee, saith Horus, O thou twentieth 
“pylon of the Still-Heart. I know thee, and I know 
“thy name, and (69) I know the 
“name of the being who is within 
“thee. ‘Stone (?) of her lord, 
“field with a serpent (?), Clother, 
“what she createth she hideth, 
“taking possession of hearts, 
“opener of herself, is thy name. 
“She hath the (70) judgment of 
“the feeble bandaged one.” 
[Saith the pylon :—] “ Pass on, then, thou art pure.” 
XXI. (71) The Osiris Auf-ankh, triumphant, saith :— 
“Homage to thee, saith Horus, O thou twenty-first 
‘pylon of the Still-Heart. I have made [my] way. 
“T know thee, and I know thy name, (72), and I know 


Chap. cxlv. ] OF THE HOUSE OF) OSIRIS 461 


“the name of the god who guardeth thee. ‘Sword that 
“smiteth at the utterance of its own-name, goddess with 
“face turned backwards, 
“the unknown one, over- 
“thrower of him that 
“draweth nigh to her 
“flame, is thy name. 
“Thou keepest the secret 
“things of the avenger of 
“the god who guardeth 


“thee, and his name is 

“(73) Amam. He maketh it to come to pass that 
“the cedar trees grow not, that the acacia trees bring 
“not forth, and that copper is not begotten in the 
“mountain. The divine sovereign chiefs of this pylon 
“are as seven gods. Tchen or At is the name of the 
(74) one at the door; Hetep-mes is the name of the 
“second; Mes-sep is the name of the third; Utch-re 
‘is the name of the fourth ; Ap-uat is the name of the 
“fifth ; Beq is the name of the sixth ; and Anpu is the 
“name of the seveuth.” 

(75) “I have made [my] way. I am Amsu-Heru, 
“the avenger of his father, the heir of his father 
‘“‘Un-nefer. I have come, and I have caused to be 
“overthrown all the enemies of my father Osiris. I 
“have come day by day with victory, doing myself the 
“worship of the god (76) in the house of his father 
“Tem, the lord of Annu. ‘The Osiris Auf-ankh, 
“triumphant, is in the southern heaven. I have 


462 THE CHAPTERS OF THE PYLONS S(Chap cxly. 


“done what is right and true for him that made 
“vioht and truth; I have celebrated the Haker 
“festivals for the lord thereof; I have led the way 
“in the festival; I have given cakes unto the lords 
‘of the altar; (77) and I have brought offerings and 
“ oblations, and cakes, and ale, and oxen, and ducks, to 
“my father Osiris Un-nefer. I have my being in a 
“body which hath a soul, and I make the Bennu 
“bird to come forth at [my| words. I have come daily 
“into the house of the god to make offerings of incense. 
“T have brought (78) garments of byssus, and I have 
“sailed on the [sacred] lake in the Neshem boat. I have 
“made Osiris, the Governor of Amentet, to be trium- 
‘“phant over his enemies ; I have carried away all his 
“foes to the place of slaughter in the Hast; and they 
“shall never come forth from the durance of the god 
“(79) Seb therein. I stand up for him [along with] 
“the divine Kefaui of Ra, and I make [him] to be 
“triumphant (?). I have come even as a scribe and I 
‘“lhave made all things plain. I have made the god to 
“have power over his legs. I have come into the 
“house of ‘him that is upon his hill’ (7.e., Anubis), 
“and I have seen him that is ruler in the divine hall 
“(d.e., Anubis). (80) Ihave entered into Re-stau; I 
“have hidden myself, and I have found out the way: 
“T have travelled unto An-rut-f. I have clothed him 
“that was naked, (81) I have sailed up to Abtu 
“ (Abydos), I have praised the gods Hu and Sau. I 
“have entered into the house of Astes, and I have 


Chap. cxlv. ] OF THE HOUSE OF OSIRIS 463 


“made supplication to the (82) Khati gods and to 
“Sekhet in the Temple of Neith,” or as others say, 
“to the princes. I have entered into Re-stau; I have 
“hidden myself, and I have found out the way; I have 
“travelled (83) unto An-rut-f. I have clothed him 
‘who was naked. I have sailed up to Abtu; I have 
“praised Hu and Sa. I have received my (84) 
‘crown (?) at my rising, and I have crowned myself 
“upon my throne in the habitation of my father and 
“of the first company of the gods. I have worshipped 
“fin my] birthplace of Ta-tchesertet, and my mouth 
“is filled (?) with (85) right and truth. I have drowned 
“the serpent Akhkha. I have come into the Great 
“House which giveth vigour unto the limbs; and it 
“hath been granted unto me to sail about in the Boat 
“of Hai. The fragrance of dnt unguent ariseth from 
(86) the hair of the beimgs who have knowledge. I 
“have entered into the house of Astes, and I have 
“made supplication unto the Khati gods and unto 
“ Sekhet in the Temple of the (87) Prince.” 

[Saith the pylon:—] “Thou hast come being a 
“favoured one in Tattu, O Osiris Auf-ankh, trium- 
“»hant, son of Sheret-Amsu, triumphant.” 


404 THE CHAPTERS OF THE SECRET PYLONSsiGheedu: 


CHAPTER CXLVI. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 25). ] 


Vignettes : (1) Ani and his wife adoring the gods; (2) Ten 
pylons. 


Text: (1) [Here BEGIN] THE CHAPTERS OF ENTER- 
ING IN AT THE SECRET PYLONS OF THE HOUSE OF 
Ostris in Sexuer-(2) Aanruru I. The Osiris Nu, 
the overseer of the house of the overseer of the seal, 
triumphant, when he cometh to the first pylon (8) of 
Osiris, saith :-— 


Ch, cxlvi.] THE CHAPTERS OF THE SECRET PYLONS 405 


“T have made [my] way. I know you, and I know 
“your name, and I know (4) 
“the name of the god who 
“ouardeth you. ‘Lady of 
“tremblings, with lofty walls, 
“the sovereign (5) lady, the 
“mistress of destruction, who 
“setteth in order the words 
“which drive back the whirl- 
“wind and the storm, who 
‘“‘delivereth from destruction 
“him that travelleth along 
“the way,’ (6) is thy name. 
“The name of thy doorkeeper 
SIN EFT, 5 

II. The Osiris Nu, (7) when 
pylon of Osiris, saith :— 

“T have made [my] way. I 
“know you, and I know (8) 
“your name, and I know the 


| 
Te EA OA Ro an es 


“name of the god who guardeth 
‘OO MTOU UU UOT 


“you. ‘Lady of heaven, the 
“mistress of the world, who 
“devoureth with fire, the 
“lady of (9) mortals, who 
“knoweth mankind, is thy 
“name. The name of thy 


1 | 


“doorkeeper is Mes-Peh” (or 
‘“ Mes-Ptah). 
VOL, II, 


eS 


ba] 


466 THE CHAPTERS OF THE SECRET PYLONS [Ch.clavi. 


III. The Osiris Nu, (10) when he cometh to the third 
pylon of Osiris, saith :— 

‘“T have made [my] way. 
“T know (11) you, and I 
“Know your name, and I 
“know the name of the 
“ood who guardeth you. 
“«Tady of the (12) altar, 
“the lady to whom abun- 
“dant offerings are made, 
“in whom every god re- 
“joiceth on the day of 
“sailing up to Abtu (Aby- 
dos), is thy name. The 
“name of thy doorkeeper is Ertat-(13)Sebanqa.” 

IV. The Osiris Nu, (14) when he cometh to the fourth 
pylon of Osiris, saith :-— 

“T have made [my] way. I 
“know you, and I know (15) 
“your name, and I know the 
“name of the god who guardeth 
“you. ‘She who  preyaileth 
“with knives, the mistress of 
“the world, (16) destroyer of the 
“foes of the Still-Heart, who 

maketh the decree for the escape 
‘of the needy from (17) evil hap,’ 
“is thy name. ‘The name of thy 
‘‘doorkeeper is Nekau,” 


Da co 


Blacamdie cas 


Ch, cxlvi.] THE CHAPTERS OF THE SECRET PYLONS 467 


V. The Osiris Nu, (18) when he cometh to the fifth 
pylon of Osiris, saith :— 1 

“T have made [my] way. a if) aia 
“T know you, and I know 
“(19) your name, and I know ee ee 


go00 0000000; 
“the name of the god who a 


i 

“ouardeth you. ‘Fire, the = || 

“lady of flames, who inhaleth SA\\ 147 

. . . f———} = 

(20) the supplications which L/ fn aes i 

“are made to her, who per- ee ry 
“mitteth.not the...... ASP SE 


“to enter in, is thy name. Seal 
“The name of thy doorkeeper ||/EBS TE 
“Gs Henti-Requ.” 

VI. (21) The Osiris Nu, when he cometh to the sixth 
pylon of Osiris, saith :— 

“T have made [my] way. I 
“know (22) you, and I know 
“your name, and I know the 
“name of the god who guardeth 
“vou. (23) ‘Lady of light, the 
“Jady to whom abundant sup- 
“plication is made; the differ- 
“ence between her height and 
“her breadth is unknown; the 
“like of her hath never been 
“found (24) since the begin- 


“ning. There is a serpent 


“thereupon whose size is not known ; it was born (25) 


468 THE CHAPTERS OF THE SECRET PYLONS [Ch. cxlvi. 


‘in the presence of the Still-heart, is thy name. The 
“name of the doorkeeper is Semamti.” 

VII. (26) The Osiris Nu, when 
he cometh to the seventh pylon 
of Osiris, saith :— 

“T have made [my] way. (27) 
‘“T know you, and I know your 
“name, and I know the name (28) 
“of the god who guardeth you. 
“*Robe which doth clothe the 
‘divine feeble one, weeping (29) 
‘for what it loveth and shrouding 
“the body,’is thyname. The name 
“ of the doorkeeper is Akenti.” 
VIII. (30) The Osiris Nu, when he cometh to the eighth 
pylon of Osiris, saith :— 

“T have made [my] (31) 
“way. I know you, and I 
“know your name, and I 
“know the name of the 
“ood (32) who guardeth 
“you. ‘Blazing fire, the 
“flame whereof [cannot] be 
“quenched, provided with 
“tongues of flame (33) 
“which reach afar, the 
“slaughtering one, the irre- 
“sistible one, through whom 
‘‘a man may not pass by reason of the hurt which she 


Givcxlvi,] THE CHAPTERS OF THE SECRET PYLONS 469 


“doeth,’ is thy name. (84) The name of the doorkeeper 
“is Khu-tchet-f.” 

IX. (85) The Osiris Nu, when he cometh to the ninth 
“pylon of Osiris, saith :— 

“JT have made [my] way. (36) I 
‘know you, and I know your name, 
“and I know the name of the god 
(37) who guardeth you. ‘She who 
“js in the front, the lady of strength, 
“quiet of heart, who giveth birth 
“to her lord; whose girth is three 
“hundred and fifty measures ; (38) 
“who sendeth forth rays like the 


| LL 


“natch stone of the south; who 


“raiseth up the divine form and 
‘‘clotheth the feeble one; who giveth [offerings] to (39) 
‘her lord every day,’ is thy name, The name of the 
“doorkeeper is Tchesef.” 

X. (40) The Osiris Nu, when 
he cometh to the tenth pylon of 
Osiris, saith :— 

‘“T have made[my]way. (41) 
“T know you, and I know your 
“name, and I know the name of 
“the god who guardeth you. 
(42) ‘Thou who art loud of 
_“voice, who raisest up those 
‘“who cry and who make sup- 


‘plication unto her, whose voice 


470 THE CHAPTERS OF THE SECRET PYLONS [Ch. cxlvi. 


‘is loud, the terrible one, (43) the lady who is to be 
“feared, who destroyeth not that which is in her,’ is thy 
“name. ‘The name of the doorkeeper is Sekhen-ur.” ! 

XI. (44) The Osiris Nu, when he cometh to the 
eleventh pylon of Osiris, saith :— 

“T have made [my] way. I know (45) you, and I 
“know your name, and I know the name of her who 
“Gs within thee. ‘She who slaughtereth always, (46) 
“the burner up of fiends, mistress of every pylon, the 
“lady to whom acclamation is made on the (47) day of 
“darkness, is thy name. She hath the judgment of 
“the feeble bandaged one,” 

XII. (48) The Osiris Nu, when he cometh to the 
twelfth pylon of Osiris, saith :— 

“T have made [my] way. I know you, (49) and I 
“]now your name, and I know the name of her who is 
“within thee. ‘Thou who invokest thy two lands, 
(50) who destroyest those who come with flashings 
‘“‘and with fire, the lady of splendour, who hearkeneth 
“unto the speech (51) of her lord,’ is thy name. She 
“hath the judgment of the feeble bandaged one.” 

XIII. (52) The Osiris Nu, when he cometh to the 
thirteenth pylon of Osiris, saith :— 

“T have made [my] way. I know (53) you, and I 
‘know your name, and I know the name of her who is 


! In the Papyrus of Ani ten pylons only are enumerated. In the 
version of this Chapter published by Navyille (Todtenbuch, Bd. I, 
Bll. 160—162) there are twenty vignettes, and each represents a 
god seated in a chamber. The Turin Papyrus gives fifteen 
vignettes. 


Ch. exlvi] THE CHAPTERS OF THE SECRET PYLONS 471 


“within thee. ‘Osiris bringeth (54) his two hands over 
“her and maketh the god Hapi (7.e., the Nile) to send 
“forth splendour out of his hidden places,’ is thy name. 
(55) She hath the judgment of the feeble bandaged 
“fone.” 

XIV. (56) The Osiris Nu, when he cometh to the 
fourteenth pylon of Osiris, saith :— 

“T have made [my] way. (57) I know you, and I 
“know your name, and I know the name of her who is 
“within thee. (58) Lady of might, who danceth on the 
“blood-red ones, who keepeth the festival of Haker on 
“the day of the hearing (59) of faults, is thy name. 
“She hath the judgment of the feeble bandaged one.” 

XY. The fifteenth pylon. The Osiris Heru-em-khebit, 
triumphant, saith when he cometh to this pylon :—(88) 
“The Fiend, red of hair and eyes, who cometh forth 
“by night, (39) and doth fetter the fiend in his lair ; 
“may her hands be given to the Still-Heart (40) in his 
“hour, and may [she] advance and go forward,’ [is thy 
name]. She hath the judgment of the feeble (41) 
“bandaged one.” 

XVI. The sixteenth pylon. The Osiris Heru-em- 
khebit, triumphant, saith (42) when he cometh forth 
to this pylon :—‘ ‘Terrible one, the lady of the rain- 
“storm, who planteth ruin (?) in the (43) souls of men, 
“the devourer of the dead bodies of mankind, the 
“orderer, and producer, and (44) creator of slaughter,’ 
“lis thy name|. She hath the judgment of the feeble 
“bandaged one.” (45) 


472 THE CHAPTERS OF THE SECRET PYLONS [Ch cxivi. 


XVII. The seventeenth pylon. [The Osiris Heru- 
em-khebit, triumphant, saith when he cometh forth to 
“this pylon :—] “‘ Hewer-in-pieces in blood, Ahabit (?), 
“lady of (46) hair,’ [is thy name]. She hath the judg- 
“ment of the feeble bandaged one.” 

XVIII. The eighteenth pylon. The Osiris Heru-em- 
khebit, triumphant, (47) saith when he cometh to this 
pylon :—‘ ‘ Lover (48) of the fire, pure of slaughterings 
“which she loveth, cutter off of heads, (49) venerated 
“one (?), lady of the Great House, destroyer of fiends 
“ut eventide,’ {is thy name] (50). She hath the judg- 
“ment of the feeble bandaged one.” 

XIX. The nineteenth pylon. (51) The Osiris Heru- 
em-khebit, triumphant, saith when he cometh to this 
‘pylon :—‘‘ Dispenser of light during her period (52) 
‘of life, watcher of flames, the lady of the strength 
“and of the writings of the god Ptah himself,’ [is thy 
‘“name]. She hath the judgment (53) of the bandages 
“of Per-an” (or Per-hetch). 

XX. The twentieth pylon. The Osiris Heru-em- 
khebit, triumphant, saith when he cometh to this 
pylon :—(54) “‘She who dwelleth within the cavern 
“of her lord, Clother is her name, (55) she hideth what 
“she hath created, she taketh possession of hearts, she 
“swalloweth (?),’ [is thy name]. She hath (56) the 
“Judgement of the bandages of Per-an” (or Per-hetch). 

XXI. The twenty-first pylon. The Osiris Heru-em- 
khebit, triumphant, saith when he cometh to this 
pylon :—(57) “‘ Knife which cutteth, when [its name] 


Chap. cxlvii.] THE FIRST ARIT 473 


“is uttered, (58) and slayeth those who advance 
“towards its flames,’ [is thy name]. She hath (59) 
“secret plots and counsels.” 


CHAPTER CXLVII. 
[irom the Papyrus of Ani (Brit. Mus. No. 10,470, sheets 11 and 12). } 
Tue First Arir. 


Vignette: Ani and his wife Thuthu approaching the first 
Arit, at the entrance of which sit three gods, having the head 
of a hare, of a serpent, and of a crocodile respectively. — 


Text: (1) The name of the doorkeeper is Sekhet- 
hra-asht-aru ; the name of the 
(2) watcher is [Se]metti; the 
name of the herald is Ha- 
kheru. The Osiris Ani, (3) 
triumphant, shall say when 


| a i ae 


he cometh unto ‘the first 
Arit:—“I am the mighty 
“one who createth his own 
“light. (4) I have come 
“unto thee, O Osiris, and, 


“purified from that which 
“defileth thee, I adore thee. 
“Lead on: (5) name not the 
“name of Re-stau unto me. 
“Homage to thee, O Osiris, 


474 THE SECOND ARIT [Chap. cxlvii. 
“in thy might and in thy strength (6) in Re-stau. 
“Rise up and conquer, O Osiris, in Abtu. Thou 
“ooest round about heaven, thou sailest in the 
“presence of Ra, (7) thou lookest upon all the 
“beings who have knowledge. Hail, Ra, thou who 
“circlest in the sky! Verily I say, O Osiris, I am 
“the spiritual body (sah) (8) of the god, and I say, 
“(9) let me not be driven (10) hence, nor upon (11) 
“the wall of (12) burning coals, (13) Open the way 
“in (14) Re-stau, (15) ease the (16) pain of Osiris, 
“(17) embrace that which the balance hath weighed ; 
“make a path for -him in the great valley, make 
“light to be on the way to Osiris.” 


THE SEconD ARIT. 
Vignette: An Arit guarded by three gods having the head 
of a lion, of a man, and of a dog respectively. 

Text: (1) The name of the (2) doorkeeper is Un-hat; 
(3) the name of the watcher is 
Seqet-(4)hra; the name of the 
herald (5) is Uset. The Osiris 
Ani, triumphant, shall say when 
he cometh (6) to this Arit :— 
“He sitteth to do his heart’s 
“desire, and he weigheth (7) 
“words as the second of Thoth. 
“The strength which protecteth 
“Thoth humbleth the hidden 
“Maat gods (?) (8) who feed 


- 


Chap. exlvii.] THE THIRD ARIT 475 


“upon Maat throughout the years [of their lives]. I 
“make offerings (9) at the moment when he maketh his 
“way; I pass on and enter upon the way. Grant thou 
“that I may pass onwards and that I may gain sight 
“of Ra together with those who make offerings.” 


Tur Tutrp Arir. 


Vignette: An Arit guarded by three gods having the head 
of a jackal, of a dog, and of a serpent respectively. 


Text: (1) The name of the (2) doorkeeper is Am- 
hauatu(3)-ent-pehui; the name of the watcher (4) is 
Seres-(5)hra; the name of the 
herald is Aa. The Osiris Ani, 
triumphant, shall say [when he 
cometh to this Arit:]—“I am 
“the hidden one (6) [in] the 
“oreat deep, [I am] the judge 
“of the Rehui. I have come 
“and I have done away with 
“the offensive thing which was 
“upon Osiris. I am fastening 
“the place whereon he shall 
“stand (7) which projecteth from the Ureret crown. I 
“have perfected matters in Abtu, I have opened the 
“way in Re-stau, I have eased (8) the pain which was 
“in Osiris. Ihave made straight his standing place, 


“and I have made [his] path. He shineth in Re-stau.” 


470 THE FOURTH AND FIFTH ARITS [Chap, cxlvii. 


THe Fourtn Arirt, 


Vignette: An Arit guarded by three gods having the head 
of a man, of a hawk, and of a lion respectively. 


Text: (1) The name of (2) the doorkeeper is 
Khesef-hra-asht-(3)kheru ; the name of the (4) watcher 
is Seres-tepu; (5) the name of 
the herald is (6) Khesef-at. The 
Osiris Ani, triumphant, shall say 
[when he cometh to this Arit] :— 
“T am the Bull, (7) the son of 
“the ancestress of Osiris. O 
‘“orant ye that his father, the 
“lord of his godlike (8) com- 
‘anions, may bear witness for 
‘him, I have weighed the guilty 
“in judgment. I have brought unto (9) his nostrils 
‘the life which is everlasting. I am the son of Osiris, 
‘“‘T have made the way. I have passed thereover into 
“ Neter-khert.” 


Tue Firra Arr. 


Vignette: An Arit guarded by three gods having the head 
of a hawk, of a man, and of a snake respectively. 


Text ; (1) The name (2) of the deorkeeper is Ankh- 
f-em-fent ; (8) the name of the watcher is (4) Shabu ; 
the name of (5) the herald is Teb-hra-(6)ha-kheft. 
The Osiris Ani, triumphant, shall say [when he cometh 


Chap. cxlvii.] THE SIXTH ARIT 477 


to this Arit] :—‘I have brought [unto thee] the bones 
“of thy (7) jaws in Re-stau, I have brought thee thy 
“backbone in Annu (Heliopolis), 
“oathering together its manifold 
“parts (8) therein. I have driven 
“back Apep for thee, I have spit 
“upon the wounds [which are in 
him], [ have made a path among 
“vou. Iam (9) the Ancient One 
“among the gods. I have made 


“the offering of Osiris, I have 
co) 5) 


“avenged (?) him in triumph 

pA, 
“oathering his bones and bringing together all his 
“limbs.” 


Tue Sixtu Arrr, 


Vignette: An Arit guarded by three gods, the first having 
the head of a jackal, and the second and third the head of a 
dog. 

Text: (1) The name (2) of the 
doorkeeper is Atek-tau-kehaq- 
(3)kheru; the name of the (4) 
watcher is An-hra; (5) the name 
of the herald is (6) Ates-hra-[ari]- 
she. The Osiris Ani, triumphant, 
shall say [when he cometh to this 
Arit]:—‘“I have come (7) daily, 
“T have come daily. I have 


“made [my] way; I have passed 


478 THE SEVENTH ARIT [Chap. cxlvii, 


“along that which was created by Anpu (Anubis), I 
“am the lord of the Ureret crown, (8) possessing words 
“of magical power, the avenger of Maat. I have 
“avenged his Hye, I have delivered (9) Osiris, and 
“T have made the way; the Osiris Ani passeth along 
“with you in [triumph ].” 


Tue Seventy ARrir. 


Vignette: An Arit guarded by three gods having the head 
of a hare, of a lion, and of a man respectively. 


Text: (1) The name (2) of the doorkeeper is 
Sekhemet-em-tesu-(3)sen ; the name of the (4) watcher 
is Aa-maa-kheru; (5) the name 
of the herald is Khesef-khemi. 
The Osiris Ani, triumphant, (6) 
shall say [when he cometh to 
this Arit]:—‘“‘TI have come unto 
“thee, O Osiris, who art cleansed 
“of [thine] impurities. Thou 
‘“‘ooest round about heaven, thou 
“seest Ra, thou seest the beings 
“ who have knowledge. (7) [ Hail, | 
“Only One! behold, thou art in 
“the Sektet boat [as] it goeth round about the horizon 
‘of heaven, I speak what I will unto his spiritual 
“body (sah); (8) it waxeth strong and it cometh into 
‘being, even as he spake. Thou meetest his face. 


Chap. cxlvii.] THE SEVENTH ARIT 479 


“Prosper thou for me all the ways [which lead] unto 
“thee,” } 


1 In the Papyrus of Thenna the scribe the following words are 
added :—‘‘ If [these] words be recited by the deceased when he 
‘cometh to the seven Arits and entereth into the pylons he shall 
‘‘neither be turned back nor repulsed before Osiris, and he shall 
‘*he made to have his being among the blessed Khus and to have 
‘dominion among the principal followers of Horus. If these 
‘things shall be done for any deceased person he shall have his 
‘being there like a lord of eternity in one body along with Osiris, 
‘‘and at no place shall any great fight be made [concerning him].” 


* 


480 OF PROVIDING FOOD (Chap. exlviii, 


CHAPTER CXLVIII. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 11).] 


TC 

a | A |) 
(RE idan eR = 
“C1 ee vieee 


= 
u 


ems 
5) 
~~ Q, 


° 
« 
2, 


ibe et) 
rl 


py 4 is 
‘lp: 
sin 


AN] 


=i 
( 
‘ 


| 


i 


a4 
TT] 


Vignette: A hall, or shrine, within which, on the left, Ani 
stands before two tables of offerings adoring Ra (or Osiris), 
hawk-headed, Next are ranged seven kine and a bull, each 


Ch, exlviii.] THE SEVEN DIVINE COWS AND THEIR BULL 481 


animal having offerings before it. Behind are four rudders, 
emblematic of the cardinal points, and on the extreme right 
are four triads of gods. The speech of Ani reads :—~ Homage 
“to thee, O thou lord, thou lord of right and truth, the only 
“One, the lord of eternity and creator of everlastingness, [ 
“have come unto thee, O my lord Ra, I have made offerings 
“of herbs unto the seven kine and unto their bull. O ye who 
*oive cakes and ale unto the Ahus, grant ye to my soul to be 
“with you. May Osiris Ani be born upon your thighs; may he 
“be like unto one of you for ever and for ever; and may he 
“Hecome a Khu in the beautiful Amenti.” 


Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF PROVIDING THE DE- 
CEASED WITH FOoD [IN THE UNDERWORLD]. The 
Osiris Nu, the overseer of the house of the overseer 
of the seal, triumphant, the son of the overseer of the 
house of the overseer of the seal, Amen-hetep, trium- 
phant, saith :— 

(2) “ Homage to thee, O thou who shinest from thy 
“Disk, thou living [Soul] who comest forth from the 
“horizon, the Osiris Nu knoweth thee, and he knoweth 
“thy name, and he knoweth the name of (3) thy seven 
“\ine and of the bull that belongeth unto them. Hail, 
“‘ve who give cakes, and ale, and splendour to the souls 
‘who are provided with food in the underworld, (4) 
“orant ye cakes and ale unto the Osiris Nu; provide 
“ye him with food, let him be in your following, and 
“Jet him be born upon your thighs.” 

[Here follow the names of the seven kine and of their 
bull, with the address to them by the deceased. | 
* (1) Het-kau-Nebt-er-tcher. (2) Akert-khentet-auset-s. 
(3) Meh-khebitet-sah-neter. (4) Ur-mertu-s-teshert- 

VOL, II, rs) 


482 THE FOUR RUDDERS OF HEAVEN [Chap. calviii. 


sheni. (5) Khenemet-em-ankh-annuit. (6) Sekhemet- 
ren-s-em-abet-s. (7) Shenat-pet-utheset-neter. (8) 
Ka-tchai-kauit.! 

“|Hail, ye cows and bull,| grant ye cakes, and ale, 
“and offerings of food, to the Osiris Nu, and supply ye 
“him with food, (8) and make him to be a perfect Khu 
“in the underworld.” 

| Here follow the addresses to the four rudders by the 
deceased. | 


(1) ‘‘Hail, thou beautiful Power, thou beautiful 
“rudder of the northern heaven ; 


(2) ‘‘ Hail, thou who revolvest, thou pilot of the two 
“lands, thou beautiful rudder of the western heaven ; 


! I.e., ‘* Bull, making the kine to be fruitful.” 


Chap. exlviii.] THE FOUR RUDDERS OF HEAVEN 483 


CT aa 
i 
= re 
— 


(3) “Hail, thou shining one, who dwellest in the 
“Temple wherein are the gods in visible forms, thou 
“beautiful rudder of the eastern heaven ; 


anaa 
NA) 


(4) “Hail, thou who dwellest within the Temple of 


=< 


m 


| 


a | 


“the ruddy beings, thou beautiful rudder of the 
“southern heaven ; 

‘‘orant ye cakes, and ale, and offerings of food, and 
“splendour to the Khu of the Osiris Nu. (11) Grant 
“ye unto him life, and strength, and health, and abid- 
“ing joy of heart upon earth, and grant ye unto him 
“{triumph] in the horizon of Annu, and in heaven, and 
“upon earth, and in the underworld! . 

[Here follow the addresses to the four triads, | 


1 Reading madkherw em khut Annu pet ta twat. 


484 ADDRESS TO THE GODS (Chap. cxlviii. r2. 


(12) “Hail, ye fathers of the gods, hail, ye mothers 
‘“‘of the gods, ye who are above the earth and who 
“dwell in the underworld, deliver ye the Osiris Nu 
(13) from every obstacle of evil [from every attack of 
evil], from the cruel snare, and [from] the slaughter- 
“ino knives, and from every wicked and evil thing 
“whatsoever (which) ye could order to be done unto 
“him (14) by men, and by gods, and by the Ahus, and 
‘ly the dead on this day, or on this night, or in this 
‘month, or in this half-monthly festival, or (15) in this 
“year, or in any of the seasons thereof whatsoever.” 


RUBRIC: [These words] shall be said when Ra appeareth 
over [figures] of the gods written (07 painted) in colour upon a 
board (?), and thou shalt place offerings and (16) tchefauw food 
before them, cakes, ale, flesh, feathered fowl, and incense, and 
they shall cause the deceased to possess sepulchral meals with 
Ra, and shall give him (17) an abundance of food in the under- 
world, and shall deliver him from every evil thing whatsoever. 
And thou shalt not recite this book of Un-nefer in the presence 
of (18) any person except thine own self. And if this be done 
for the deceased Ra shall be a rudder for him and shall be a 
strength protecting him, and he shall make an end of all (19) 
his enemies for him in the underworld, and in heaven, and 
upon earth, and in every place wheresoever he may enter, and 
he shall have abundance of food regularly and continually for 
ever. 


Chap. exlix.] THE FIRST AAT 485 


CHAPTER CXLIX. 
[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheets 28, 29, 30). ] 
The Fourteen Aats, or divisions of Sekhet-Aanru. 
I. Vignette: The first Aat. 


Text: (1) The first Aat [which is to be painted] 
green. The Osiris Nu, the overseer of the house of 
the overseer of the seal, triumphant, saith :— (2) 

“Hail, thou Aat of Amentet, wherein a man liveth 
“pon cakes and ale,! remove thy wigs (3) when I come 
“towards thee. And behold, the ; 
“Mighty god who dwelleth in thee |=~au @9! 
“hath bound up my bones, and he : 
“hath stablished my members; (4) 


“and the Ahi, the lord of hearts, | 
“hath gathered (?) together my | 
“bones, and hath stablished the 
“Ureret crown of Tem [upon my 
“head; and Neheb-kau hath (5) stablished for me 
“my head. Full, full, and stablished is the Balance. 


“Thou shalt have dominion among the gods, O 
“ Amsu-qéet.” 


! Or, ‘upon bread [made of ] the finest grain,” 


486 THE SECOND AAT [Chap. exlix, 
If. Vignette: The second Aat. The horizon. 


Text: (1) The second Aat [which is painted] green. 
“The god therein is Ra-Heru-khuti.” The Osiris Nu 
saith :— 


“T am the mighty one of possessions in Sekhet- 
“Aarm. Hail, thou Sekhet-(2)Aarru, the walls of 
“which are of 
“] POR meet © 
“height of the 
‘““wheat thereof 
‘as five cubits, 
“the ears (3) 
- “thereof being 
“two cubits long 
“and the stalks three cubits; the barley thereof is 


“seven cubits in height, the ears being three cubits 
“long and (4) the stalks four cubits. And. behold, the 
“Khws, each of whom therein is nine cubits in height, 
‘“‘yeap the wheat and the barley (5) side by side with 
“TTeru-khuti (Harmachis). I know the door which is 
‘in the middle of Sekhet-Aarru wherefrom (6) Ra cometh 
“forth into the eastern part of heaven; the southern 
“portion thereof is in the Lake of the Aharw fowl, and 
“the northern portion thereof is in the Canal of the Re 
“fowl, (7) in the place wherein Ra saileth round about 
“by means of the winds which bear him along. I am 
“he who watcheth the leathers in (8) the divine boat, * 
“Tam in the boat, and Iam he who doth navigate it 


-« 
ae. 


Chap. exlix. ] THE THIRD AAT 487 


‘without ceasing. I know (9) the two sycamore trees 
“of turquoise, from between which the god Ra doth 
“emerge when he setteth out upon his journey (10) 
“over the pillars of Shu towards the door of the lord 
“of the Kast, wherefrom Ra cometh forth. I (11) 
“know the Sekhet-Aarru of Ra. The wheat therein 
‘is (12) five cubits in height, the ears being two cubits 
“Jong, and the stalks three cubits; the barley thereof 
“is seven cubits in height, (13) the ears being three 
“cubits long and the stalks four cubits. And behold, 
“the Khus therein, who are nine cubits in height, (14) 
“reap the wheat and the barley, side by side with the 
“divine Souls of the Kast.” 


Ill. Vignette: The third Aat, which is called “the Aat 
of the Ahus.” 

Text: (1) The third Aat [which is to be painted] 
ereen, The Osiris Nu, triumphant, saith :— 

“Hail, thou Aat of the Khus, whereover none can 
“sail (2) and wherein are the Khus; the fire thereof 
“is blazing with flame. Hail, thou 
“Aat of (3) the Khus! Your faces 
“are in the land (?) [make clear your 
“ways|, and purify ye your Aats, and 
“what hath been decreed by Osiris do 
“ve for me (4) for ever. I am the 
“mighty one of the T'eshert crown 


“which is on the brow of the god 
‘of Light, and which maintaineth in life the two lands 


488 THE FOURTH AAT [Chap. exlix. 


“and the men and women thereof (5) by means of the 
“flame of its mouth. 'The god Ra hath been delivered 
‘from the Fiend Apep.” 


IV. Vignette: The fourth Aat, wherein is inscribed “the 
double mountain, doubly high, and doubly great.” 

Text: (1) The fourth Aat [which is to be painted] 
green. The Osiris Nu, triumphant, saith :— (2) 

“Hail, thou who art chief of the hidden Aat. Hail, 
“thou One who art lofty and great, who dwellest in the 
‘underworld, over whom the 
‘heaven spreadeth itself. (3) 
“Thou art three hundred 
“measures in length, and 
“two hundred and _ thirty 
“measures in width, and 
“thou hast over thee a ser- 
“pent the name of which is 
‘Sati-temui!(?); (4) he is seventy cubits in length, 
‘and he liveth by slaughtering the Khus and the dead 
“who are in the underworld. I stand up in thy 
‘enclosure, (5) O Maa, I sail round about, and I see 
“the way [which leadeth] unto thee. I gather myself 
“tooether to thee. I am the Man, and I clothe (6) thy 
“head; I am strong andI have become strong. I am 


“the god who is mighty in enchantments; my two 
“eyes have been given to me, and I am glorious (7) 
“therewith. Who art thou, O Ahw that goest upon 


1 T.e., Sati of the two knives, 


Chap. exlix.] THE FIFTH AAT 489 


“thy belly, and whose two-fold strength is upon thy 
“mountain? Grant thou unto me (8) that I may go 
“unto thee, and that thy two-fold strength may be 
“with me. I lift up myself by [thy] two-fold strength, 
“T have come, (9) and I have vanquished the Asriu 
“serpent of Ra. His peace is to me at eventide; I 
“revolve in (10) the heavens and thou art in the 
“mountain valley. A decree [hath been made] con- 
“cerning thee upon earth.” 


Vv. Vignette: The fifth Aat. 


Text: (1) The fifth Aat [which is to be painted | 
green. The Osiris Nu, triumphant, saith :— 


“Hail, thou Aat of the Khus, whereover none may 
“pass. (2) The Khuws who are therein have thighs 
“seven cubits long, and they live 
“upon the shades of the weak and 
“helpless. (3) Hail, thou Aat of 
“the Khus, open ye unto me your 
“ways so that I may pass by you 
“and may go on (4) to the beautiful 
“« Amentet, according to that which 
“Qsiris, the Khu, the lord of Khus, 
“hath decreed. I live by reason of my splendour, (5) 


“JT perform every festival of the month, and I observe 
“rightly the festival of the half month. I revolve, 
“and the Kye of Horus is under my hand in the (6) 
“following of Thoth. The mouth of every god and 


490 THE SIXTH AND SEVENTH AATS (Chap. exlix. 


“of every dead person devoureth mine enemy this day, 
“and he falleth down at the block of slaughter.” 

VI. Vignette: The sixth Aat, with a fish inside it. 

Text: (1) The sixth Aat [which is to be painted | 
ereen, The Osiris Nu, triumphant, saith :— 

“Hail, thou Ammehet which art holy unto the gods, 
“and art hidden unto the Ahus, (2) and art baleful 


“unto the dead; the name of the 


ze We 


wcteg He <¥ 


‘ood who dwelleth therein is Sekher- 
“At (?), Homage to thee, O Amme- 
“het, I have come (8) to see the 
“‘oods who dwell in thee. Uncover 
“your faces and lay down your 
‘“head-dresses when ye meet me, 
““(4) for, behold, I am a mighty 
“ood among you, and I have come to prepare provisions 
“for you. Let not (5) Sekher-At (?) have dominion 
‘over me, let not the divine slaughterers come after me, 
“Jet not the murderous fiends come (6) after me, but 


“Jet me live upon sepulchral offerings among you.” 


VII. Vignette : The seventh Aat. 


Text: (1) The seventh Aat [which is to be painted] 
green. ‘The Osiris Nu, triumphant, saith :— (2) 

“Hail, thou city of Ases, which art remote from 
‘“sioht, and the fire of which is in flame. There is a 
“serpent within thee (3) and his name is Rerek; the 
“Jenoth of his backbone is seven cubits, and he liveth 


Chap. cxlix.} THE EIGHTH AAT 4QI 


“upon the Khus, and he annihilateth (4) their glorious 
“strenoth. Get thee back, O Rerek, who dwellest in 
“the city of Ases, who devourest 
“with thy mouth, and from whose 
“eyes (5) evil looks pour forth. 
“Let thy bones be broken, and let 
“thy emissions be impotent. Come 
“thou not against me, and let not 
“thy emissions (6) come upon me ; 
“let thy poison fall and lie dead 
“upon the earth, and let thy two lips be in [thy] den. 
“(7) The Ka of the serpent hath fallen, and, conversely, 
“T have gained glorious strength. The Maftet (ie., 
“Tynx), hath cut off thy head.” 


VIIL. Vignette: The eighth Aat. 


Text: (1) The eighth Aat [which is to be painted] 
ereen. The Osiris Nu, triumphant, saith :— (2) 

“ Hail, Ha-hetep, great and mighty one of the canal ! 
“None can obtain the mastery over the water which is 
“therein. (3) It is mightily to be 
“feared, and the roarings which are 
“therein are mighty. The (4) name 
‘of the god therein is Qa-ha-hetep, 
“and he guardeth it gladly so that 
‘none may enter. I am the Hnnur 
“bird which is (5) above the thigh 
“of the god (?) An-ker-s, and I have 
“brought the possessions of the earth to the god Tem, 


492 THE NINTH AAT [Chap. exlix. 


“and [I] make strong and fortify the mariners [of Ra}, 
(6) I have set the terror of myself in the divine lords 
“of the shrine, and I have set the awe of me in the 
“divine lords (7) of things; therefore I shall not be 
“carried off to the slaughter block of those who would 
“willingly destroy me. (8) I am the guide of the 
“northern horizon [and I know the god who is” 
“therein |.” 


The Vv igtictce yp The ninth Aat. A crocodile thrusting his 
snout into a vase (?) called Akesi. 
Text: (1) The ninth Aat [which is to be painted] 
yellow. The Osiris Nu, triumphant, saith ;— 
“Hail, thou city Akesi, which art hidden (2) from 
“the gods, the Khus know the name of which the gods 
‘are afraid. None can enter 


etm Wii 6 


“therein, and none can come 
“forth therefrom except that 
“holy god (3) who dwelleth 
“in his egg, and who putteth 
“his fear into the gods and 
“the terror of himself into 
“the Khus. (4) The opening 
‘“linto the city] is of fire, and the winds thereof destroy 
“both nostrils and mouths, and the god hath made it 
“for those who follow willingly (5) in his train; none 
“can breathe the winds [thereof] except that holy god 
“who dwelleth in (6) his egg. He hath made the city 
“so that he may dwell therein at will, and none can 


Chap. cxlix.] THE TENTH AAT 493 


“enter therein except on the day of great (7) trans- 
“formations. Homage to thee, O thou holy god who 
““dwellest in thine egg, I have come unto thee (8) that 
‘““T may be among those who follow thee ; let me come 
“forth from the city of Akesi, let me enter therein, let 
“the gates thereof be opened unto me, let me breathe 
“the air (9) which is therein, and let me have posses- 
“sion of the offerings thereof.” 


X. Vignette: The tenth Aat. A man holding a knife in 
each hand; above him is a serpent. 


Text: (1) The tenth Aat [which is to be painted] 
yellow. The Osiris Nu, triumphant, saith :— (2) 

‘Hail, thou city of the gods Qahu, who take pos- 
“session of Ahus and gain the mastery over the shades 
“(khaibit), who devour vigorous 
“streneth (3) and consume (?) filth 
“when their eyes see, and who 
“ouard not the earth. (4) Hail, 
“ye who dwell in your Aats, cast 
“yourselves upon your bellies when 
“T pass by you. My glorious 
“strength shall not be taken away, 
(5) and none shall gain the mastery over my shade, 
“for [am a divine hawk. Offerings of dnti unguent 


“have been made ready by me, incense hath been 
“offered by me, [animals have] been slaughtered (6) 
“by me, Isis hath made offerings to my head, Nephthys 
‘“‘is behind me, and a road hath been made clear for 


494 THE ELEVENTH AAT (Chap. exlix. 


“me. [Hail,) serpent (7) Nau, Bull of Nut, Neheb- 
| 5) ’ - 

“kau, I have come unto you, O gods, deliver ye me, 

“and grant ye unto me my glorious strength for ever.” 


XI. Vignette : The eleventh Aat, wherein stands a jackal- 
headed god holding a knife. 

Text: (1) The eleventh Aat [which is to be painted] 
green. The Osiris Nu, triumphant, saith :— 

“Hail, thou city which art in (2) the underworld 
‘‘(Neter-khert), which coverest over the body and 
‘“oainest the mastery 
“over the Khus. None 
“can come forth there- 
“from and none can 
“enter therein (3) by 
“reason of fear of 
“the opposing power 
“which is therein— 


“now the gods who 
“are therein look upon it in iron(?) and (4) the dead 
“who are therein look upon it in his slaughterings— 
“except the gods who live therein in his mystery (5) of. 
“the Khus. Hail, thou city of Atu, grant thou unto 
“me that I may pass on, for I am the god who is 
‘mighty of enchantments by reason of the knife which 
“came forth from the god Suti. (6) I have my feet 
“and legs for ever. I rise like Ra, I am strong 
“through the Eye of Horus, my heart is lifted up 
(7) after it was brought low, [I am] glorious in 


Chap, cxlix. THE TWELFTH AAT 495 


‘heaven, and [I am] mighty upon earth. I fly like 
‘a hawk, (8) and I cackle like the smen goose, and it 
“hath been given to me to alight at the ‘Thigh of the 
“Take.” I stand up upon it, I sit down (9) upon it, 
“T rise up like a god, I eat of the food of Sekhti-hetep, 
“and I go onwards to the (10) domain of the starry 
“goods. The double doors of Maat aré opened unto me, 
‘“‘and the double doors of the land of the great deep 
“(11) are unbolted before me. I set up a ladder to 
“heaven among the gods, and I am a divine being 
“among them. I speak with the voice of (12) the 
““smen goose to which the gods listen, and my speech 
“and my voice are those of the star Sept (Sothis). 


” 


_ XO. Vignette: The twelfth Aat, called “Astchetet em 
Ament.” 

Text: (1) The twelfth Aat [which is to be painted] 
green, The Osiris Nu, triumphant, saith :— (2) 

“Hail, thou Aat of the city of Unt (?) at the head of 
“Re-stau, the flame of which is a blazing fire, the gods 
“are unable to approach thee (3) and 
“the thus are unable to gather to- 
“oether therein by reason of the urael 
“ which (4) would blot out their names. 
“Hail, thou Aat of Unt, I am in the 
“form of the mighty god who dwelleth 
“among the Kius and who dwelleth 
“in thee. (5) I am among the stars 
“that never fail within thee; I shall never fail, 


496 THE THIRTEENTH AAT [Chap. exlix. 


“and my name shall never fail. (6) ‘Hail, odour 
“of the god,’ say they, the gods who dwell in the 
“Aat of Unt; [I shall be with you, I shall live with 
“you, O ye gods who dwell in the Aat of Unt ;| love 
‘ve me more than your own gods, (7) for I shall be 
“with you for ever [in the presence of the followers of 
“the great god].” 


XII. Vignette: The thirteenth Aat, called “Uart ent 
mu.” Behind it stands the hippopotamus Hebet-re-f, with 
the right fore paw resting on a beetle. 

Text: (1) The thirteenth Aat [which is to’ be 
painted] green. The Osiris Nu, triumphant, saith :— 

“Hail, thou Aat wherein the Khus gain (2) no 
“mastery. Thy waters are of fire, and the streams 
“which are in thee 
“burn with fire, and 
(3) thy flame is a 
“blazing fire, those 
“who are there and 
“who wish to drink 
“thy waters to 
“quench (4) their 
“thirst cannot do 
‘so by reason of the mighty dread which possesseth 
“them and by reason of the great terror which it causeth 
“them to have. The gods and the Ahus (5) look 
‘upon the waters thereof and retreat without having 
‘quenched their thirst, and their hearts are not (6) 


Chap. cxlix. ] THE THIRTEENTH AAT 497 


“set at rest ; and though they wish to enter into them 
“they cannot do so, The stream is filled with reeds, 
“even as the stream (7) which floweth from the issues 
“which come forth from Osiris. I have gained the 
“mastery over the waters [thereof], I have drunk 
“from the canal [thereof] (8) like the god who dwelleth 
“in the Aat of the waters, and who is the euardian 
“thereof. The gods are more afraid to drink (9) the 
‘waters thereof than are the Ahus, and they retreat ! 
“therefrom. Homage to thee, O thou god who dwellest 
“in the Aat of the waters, (10) I have come unto thee, 
“orant thou that I may gain power over the waters 
“thereof |, and that I may drink from the canal 
“thereof, (11) even as thou dost allow to drink the 
“oreat god from whom cometh Hap (/.¢., the Nile), 
“who maketh green things to come into being, (12) 
“who maketh to grow the things which grow, who 
“maketh vigorous young plants and herbs, and who 
“also giveth to the gods gifts which proceed from him 
“and offerings (?). And grant thou that I may come 
“to Hap, (13) and that I may gain power over young 
“plants and herbs, for I am the son of thy body for 
“ever.” 


XIV. Vignette: The fourteenth Aat. A range of moun- 
tains called “ Field of Kher-aha,” a man holding a libation vase, 
the god Anubis, a hawk with a disk, a lion-god, a man setting 
the tesher crown upon a god, a hippopotamus, a crocodile, and 
a worm, 


! Or, ‘‘ they are terrified thereat.” 
VOL. II. At 


498 THE FOURTEENTH AAT [Chap. exlix. 


Text : (1) The fourteenth Aat [which is to be painted] 
yellow. The Osiris Nu, triumphant, saith :— (2) 

“Hail, thou Aat of Kher-aiha, which turneth back 
“Hap at Tattu, grant thou that Hap may come (3) 
“abundant in grain as 
‘he advanceth for the 
“mouth of those who 
“eat, and giving divine 
“offerings to the gods, 
“and (4) sepulchral meals 
“to the Khus, There is 
‘“‘a serpent in the double 
“gerti of Abu (Elephan- 
tine) at the mouth of (5) Hap, and he cometh with 
“water and he standeth up upon the Thigh of Kher-aha 
“with his divine sovereign princes (6) at the head of 
“the canal, and he seeth in his hour, which is the silence 
“of the night. Hail, ye gods of (7) Kher-aha, and ye 
“sovereign princes at the head of the canal [thereof], 
“Jet your pools be opened to me, let your streams be 
‘opened (8) to me, let me gain power over the water, 
“let me rest on the canal, let me eat grain, (9) let me 
“be satisfied with your food, let me lift myself up, let 
“my heart be great, even as [is that of] (10) the god 
‘who dwelleth in Kher-aha, let offerings like unto 
“yours be made to me, let me not be destroyed by the 
(11) issues which come forth from Osiris, and let me 
“not be withdrawn therefrom for ever,” 


C= 
HA 


Chap. cl.] THE FIFTEEN AATS 499 


CHAPTER CL! 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 30). ] 


Vignette : I. Four ser- 
pents, emblematic pro- 
bably of the cardinal 
points, and fifteen Aats:— 


I. “ Sekhet-Aarru ; 
“the god wherein is 
“ Ra-Heru-Khuti (Ra- 
“ Harmachis).” 

tie The. brow-of 
“fire; the god where- 
“in is Fa-akh (Bearer 
“of altars).” 

TIT. “ Mountain, ex- 
ceedingly high.” 

LV eA at of the 
“ Khus.” 

Vv. “Ammehet; the 
“ood wherein is Sekh- 
“er-remu (Over - 
“thrower of fish).” 

VI. “ Asset.” 

VII. “ Ha-sert, the 
“god wherein is Fa- 


1 The Papyrus of Nu 
ends with this Chapter. 


le nz MAZES Ht 
2. 
3. 
4, 

Q ZF Poi st 
5. ivlaa 
6, 
7 ( Pnhlooinsm 


To *%Zee4 (15 thf 


The Fifteen Aats of Sekhet-Aanru, 


500 


CO 


10. 


Li 


12. 


“oods wherein live upon cakes and ale (?) 


THE FIFTEEN AATS 


The Fifteen Aats of Sekhet-Aanru, 


[Chap. cl. 


“net (Bearer of 
‘“‘ Heaven.” 

VIII. “ The brow of 
“the god Qahu.” 

IX. “Atu; the god 
“wherein is Sept 
“ (Sothis).” 

X. “Unt; the god 
‘wherein is Hetemet- 
“baiu (Destroyer of 
“souls).” 

XI. “The brow ot 
“the waters; the god 
“wherein is Aa-sekh- 
“emu.” 

XII. “ Aat of Kher- 
“aha; the god where- 
“in is Hap (Nile).” 

XIII. “Stream of 
“the Lake of flame 
‘‘ which is in the fire.” 

XIV. “Akesi, the 
‘ood wherein is Maa- 
‘“‘Thet-f.” 

XV. “The beauti- 
“fal Amentet; the 


” 


in peace. 


. 


Here endeth the book 


MAME CaS 


rt tal boheoot 
ey | Obes Ha Need 
EINES 


SS 
_ te rs Sl Ki lesrseokesiLag 


TOOL) 


The Mummy Chamber (Papyrus of Ani). 


<i: Soa TAS AMIN Ee (Fase NES - Heap 


fz Mts: ses ON at SSP 


PUR SGI oN 


ane ee ues ae ie an coated qj 
Told ap NPS] 


“SS 


egy 


5 


Mites 2 
CN ae 
|e -c_ ———— 


Ch. cli.a.] ARRANGEMENT OF THE MUMMY CHAMBER 503 


CHAPTER CLIa. 
[From the Papyrus of Mut-hetep (Brit. Mus. No. 10,010, sheet 5). ] 


Vignette: The mummy chamber. In the centre, upon a 
bier, lies the mummy of the deceased; the god Anubis, jackal- 
headed, stands by the side bending over the mummy. At the 
head of the bier kneels Nephthys, and at the foot Isis. The 
walls, which are here depicted as lying flat on the ground, are 
ornamented with emblems and texts, and at each corner stands 
one of the gods of the cardinal points. Two ushadtiu figures, 
two souls, two flames, a Jef, and Anubis on his pylon, fill up 
the remaining spaces. 


Text: (1) “Thy right eye is like the Sektet boat ; 
“thy left (2) eye is like the Afet boat ; thine eyebrows | 
“are like (3) Anpu; thy fingers are like Thoth: (4) 
“thy hair is like Ptah-Seker; (5) they make a fair 
“way for thee, and they smite down (6) for thee the 
“fiends of Set.” ! 

I. Isis saith :—- (7) “‘I have come to protect thee, O 
“Osiris, (8) with the north wind which cometh forth 
“from Tem; I have (9) strengthened for thee thy 
“throat ; I have caused thee (10) to be with (11) the 
“ood ; and I have placed all thine enemies (12) under 
“thy feet.” 

II. Nephthys saith :— (1) ‘I go round about behind 
“my sister Osiris Mut-hetep. I have come that (2) I 
“may protect thee, and my strength which protecteth 


! This text is a part of the speech of Anpu; see infra, p. 507. 


504 ARRANGEMENT OF THE MUMMY CHAMBER [Ch. clia. 


“shall be behind thee for (3) ever and ever. The god 
(4) Ra hearkeneth unto thy ery; (5) thou, O daughter 
“of Hathor, art made to triumph, thy head shall never 
“be taken away from thee, and thou shalt be made to 
“vise up in peace.” 

III. A deity (?) saith :— “(1) If any would come to 
“fetter thee I will not allow him to do so; (2) if any 
“would come to hurl missiles at thee I will not allow 
“him to do so. But I will (3) fetter thee, and I will 
“hurl missiles at thee; and I am (4) protecting thee, 
“QO Mut-hetep, triumphant.” 

IV. The Jet saith:— (1) “O thou that comest 
“quickly, I turn back thy steps, (2) O Kep-hra, and 
“T illumine thy hidden (3) place. I stand behind the 
“Tet on the day (4) of turning back slaughters, (5) 
“and I am protecting thee, O Mut-hetep, (6) trium- 
“phant, before Osiris.” 

V. The flame saith :— (1) “I surround with sand 
“the hidden tomb, (2) and drive away him that would 
“attack it. I lighten the funeral mountain, I cast 
“light (3) thereon. I traverse the way, and I protect 
(4) Mut-hetep, triumphant.” 

VI. (1) Anubis, (2) who is at the head of the divine 
hall and who [dwelleth] upon his mountain, (3) the 
lord of Ta-tchesert, saith :—‘ I have come (4) to pro- 
“tect Osiris Mut-hetep, triumphant.” 

VII. (1) The living soul of Mut-(2)hetep saith :— 
‘Let (8) Ra be adored in heaven, and when (4) he 
‘setteth on the western horizon of heaven.” 


Ch. cli.a.] ARRANGEMENT OF THE MUMMY CHAMBER 505 


VIII. (1) The living soul and the perfect Khu of 
Mut-hetep, (2) triumphant (3) before Osiris, say :— 
[‘“‘ Adored be Ra when he riseth in the eastern horizon 
‘of heaven.” ] ! 

IX. a and b. (1) The lady of the house Mut-hetep, 
saith :—“ Hail, shabti figure, if I be condemned (2) or 
“Gf there be allotted to me any work to do in the 
“underworld—behold, let (8) opposition be set aside 
“such as is done by a man in his turn, namely, 
“sowing (4) the fields, and filling the channels with 
“water, and bringing the (5) sand of the west to the 
“east, O be thou present when I call unto thee.” 

X. (1) Mestha saith:— “I am thy daughter, O 
“Mut-hetep, and I have come (2) to protect thee; I 
“make thy house to germinate and to be stablished 
“firmly (3) according to what Ptah hath commanded 
“and according to what Ra hath commanded.” 

XI. (1) Hapi saith :—‘T have come to protect thee, 
“© (2) Osiris Mut-hetep ; I bind up for thee thy head 
“and thy members, I smite down thine enemies (3) for 
“thee beneath thee, and I give thee thy head for ever.” 

XIT. (1) Tua-maut-ef saith :—“I am thy daughter 
“who loveth thee, O Mut-hetep, triumphant for ever ; 
(2) I have come and I have avenged [thee, O] my 
“father Osiris, [upon him that] did [evil] unto thee 
“and I have brought (8) him under thy feet.” 

XIII. (1) Qebh-sennu-f saith :— “Tam Qebh-sennuf, 


! Added from the Papyrus of Qonna at Leyden, ed. Leemans, 
Plate xviii. 


506 ARRANGEMENT OF THE MUMMY CHAMBER [Ch. cli.s. 


“and I have come (2) that I may protect Mut-hetep ; I 
“have collected into a whole body for thee thy bones, 
“T have gathered (3) together for thee thy members, I 
“have brought thy heart and I do set it upon its seat 
“within thy body, and I make thy house to germinate 
“after thee.” 


CHAPTER CLIs." 


Vignette : The god Anpu (Anubis) standing by the mummy 
of the deceased which lies on a bier, 


Text: (1) The god Anpu, who dwelleth in the [city 
of] embalmment, the governor of the divine house, 
placeth his two hands upon the lord of life* (2) of 
Nebseni, the scribe and draughtsman of the Temple 
of Ptah, the lord of piety, the son of the scribe and 

! A shortened form of this Chapter also occurs in the Papyrus of 
Nebseni (sheet 21); it has for a vignette a male head, and is 


entitled, ‘‘ The Chapter of a head of secret things.” 
2 T.e., the dead body of Nebseni. 


Ch, cli.w.] THE SPEECH OF ANPU 507 


designer Thena, triumphant, born of the lady of the 
house Mut-resth, triumphant, (8) and he furnisheth 
him with the things which belong to him. ‘‘ Homage 
“to thee, O happy one, divine lord, who art endowed 
“with the sight of the Utchat (?), (4) Ptah-Seker hath 
“bound thee up, Anpu hath exalted thee, and Shu hath 
“caused thee to be lifted up, O (5) Face of beauty, 
“thou divine prince of eternity. Thou hast thine eye, 
“© scribe Nebseni, thou lord of piety, and beautiful it 
“is. Thy right eye is (6) in the Sektet boat, and thy 
“left eye is in the Afet boat; and thine eyebrows are 
‘of fair appearance in the presence of the (7) company 
“of the gods. Thy brow is in the protection of 
“Anpu; and the back of thy head, O beautiful one, (8) 
“is before the holy Hawk. Thy fingers are stablished 
“with written works in the presence of the lord of 
“Khemennu, Thoth, (9) who hath given to me the 
“speech of the sacred books. Thy hair is beautiful 
“before Ptah-Seker, and thou, O scribe Nebseni, thou 
“Jord of piety, art beautiful before (10) the great 
“company of the gods. The great god looketh upon 
“thee, and he leadeth thee along the path of happi- 
“ness, and sepulchral meals are bestowed upon thee ; 
“he overthroweth for thee [all] thine enemies, (11) 
“and setteth them under thee in the presence of the 
“oreat company of the gods who dwell in the mighty 
“House of the Aged One which is in Annu (Helio- 
“ polis).” 


508 OF BUILDING A HOUSE UPON EARTH [Ch. clii 


CHAPTER CLI. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 13). ] 


Vignette: The deceased standing before a house.! 


Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF BUILDING A HOUSE 
UPON THE EARTH. ‘The overseer of the house of the 
overseer of the seal, Nu, triumphant, saith :— (2) 

“Hail! Seb rejoiceth, for the Osiris Nu standeth 
“up over his body, [and he goeth round about among 
“those who follow Ra]. To men [and to the gods] 
“who have given birth to their own fathers (3) I have 
“ascribed praise; and they have sight. The goddess 
“Sesheta hath brought the god Nebt, and Anpu 
“(Anubis) hath called unto the Osiris Nu (4) to 
“build a house on the earth. Its foundation is in 
‘Annu (Heliopolis), and the circuit thereof [reacheth] 
“to Kheraha, the shrine (?) is [like that of] the god 

' In the Saite Recension (see Lepsins, op. citi, Bl. 74) the vignette 
represents the deceased seated in a chair holding out his hands to 


receive the bread and water which the kneeling goddess of the 
sycamore tree is about to give him. 


Ch. clii.] OF BUILDING A HOUSE UPON EARTH 509 


“Sekhem, who dwelleth in (5) Sekhem, according to 
“that which I have written for the renewal (?) thereof, 
“and men and women bring offerings, and libations, 
“and ministrants (?). And Osiris saith unto (6) the 
“oods who are in [his] following and who journey 
“along, ‘Behold ye the house which hath been built 
“for a Khaw who is provided (7) with [all his attributes], 
“who cometh daily to renew himself among you. O 
“hold ye him in awe, and ascribe ye unto him praises, 
“and let him be a favoured being with you; look 
“ye (8) to what I have done and to what I have said.’ 
“ And Osiris saith concerning the god, ‘Let him come 
“daily to renew himself among you. And let beasts 
“for sacrifice] be brought unto him (9) by the south 
‘wind, and let grain be brought unto him by the north 
“wind, and let barley be brought unto him from the 
“ends of the earth’; the mouth of Osiris hath ordered 
“{this| for me. Drawing onward may he (10) go round 
“about on his left hand, may he place himself on his 
“right hand, and may he see men, and the gods, and 
“the Khus, and the dead drawing him along with 
‘praises and cries of joy, (11) and may he be a 
“favoured being with them.” ! 

1 In the Saite Recension these words are followed by a speech of 


the deceased, a speech of the ‘‘ lady of the sycamores,” and a prayer 
to her on behalf of the deceased. 


510 OF ESCAPING FROM THE NET (Chap. cliii.a. 


CHAPTER CLIIIa, 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 20). ] 


YY) UY) UA 
AY YIXA XA A 
WY WW YY 


Tae nes AN 
UA AY 0 YA AYVY 
YY ANN NAY) : nN 4 


VAY XV ANY 


Vignette: A net fastened at one end to ground below or 
near water by means of a stake driven through a coil of rope 
which is drawn tight by the deceased. 


Text: (1) Tur CHarrer OF COMING FORTH FROM 
tHE Net. The Osiris Nu, the overseer of the house 
of the overseer of the seal, triumphant, saith :— 


“Hail, thou ‘god who lookest behind thee,’ thou 
“*ood who hast gained the mastery (2) over thine 
‘heart,’ I go a-fishing with the cordage of the ‘ uniter 
“of the earth, and of him that maketh a way through 
“the earth. Hail, ye fishers who have given birth to 
“your own fathers, (3) who lay snares with your nets, 
“and who go round about in the chambers of the 
“waters, take ye not me (4) in the net wherewith ye 
“ensnared the helpless fiends, and rope me not in with 
“the rope (5) wherewith ye roped in the abominable 
“ earth-followers, which had its wooden frame (?) [reach- 


Chap. cliii.a.] OF ESCAPING FROM THE NET BEY 


“ing| unto heaven, and its weighted parts upon the 
“earth. Let me come forth (i.e., escape) from the 
“eos (?) thereof, let me rejoice along with (6) the 
“ood of the Hennu boat, let me come forth from its 
‘bars (7), let me rise up like the god Sebek, and let me 
“make a flight to you away from the snare of the 
“fowler (7) whose fingers are hidden. I know the pole 
“with curved ends which is in it; ‘Mighty finger of 
“Sekri’ [is its name]. I know the mekhes which is 
“in it; (8) ‘Thigh of the god Nemu’ [is its name]. I 
“know the piece of wood which openeth in it; ‘ Hand 
“of Isis’ [is its name]. I know the knife of slaughter 
(9) which is in it; ‘Slaughtering knife wherewith 
“Tsis cut off a piece of flesh from Horus’ [is its name]. 
“T know the names of the frame (?) and weights which 
“are in it; ‘Leg and Thigh (10) of the double Lion- 
“ood’ [are their names]. I know the name of the 
“cordage wherewith it snareth [living things] ; ‘Vigour 
“of Tem’ [is its name]. (11) I know the name of the 
‘‘snarers who lay snares therewith ; ‘Akeru gods, an- 
“cestors of Akhabiu gods’ [are their names]. (12) I 
“Iknow the names of its hands; ‘Two hands of the 
“oreat god, the lord who heareth speech in Annu 
(Heliopolis) on the night of the festival of the half- 
“month in the Temple of the Moon-god’. . . (13) [are 
“their names|. I know the name of the Thigh which 
“surroundeth it at its upper part; ‘Thigh of iron 
“whereupon the gods stand’ [is its name]. I know 
(14) the name of the superintendent who receiveth 


512 OF ESCAPING FROM THE NET (Ch. cliiia. 16 


“the fish therefrom ; ‘ Knife and vessel of the superin- 
“tendent of the god’ [is hisname]. I know the name 
“of the table (15) whereat he placeth himself; ‘Table 
“ of Horus [whereat he] sitteth in solitude in the dark- 
“ness and is not seen, the abjects fear him and those 
“therein ascribe unto him (16) praises,’ [is its name ].” 
““T have come, and I am crowned (or have risen) like 
“the Mighty god who leadeth along the earth, and I 
“have gone down to the earth in the two great (17) 
“boats; and behold, the mighty one hath placed me 
“within the Temple of the Mighty god. I have come 
‘along with the snarer, my wooden tools (dit) are 
“with me, my knife is with me, (18) and my hacking 
“knife is with me; I come forth and I go round about, 
‘and I snare (?) with the Net.” 
‘“‘T know the name of the pole with curved ends; 


- 


“«Temen rew flowing (19) from the great finger of 
“QOsiris,’ [is its name]. I know the name of the two 
“pieces of wood which hold fast: ‘Hooks of the 
“ancestors of Ra” [is the name of one], and ‘Hook 
“of the ancestor of Hathor’ [is the name of the other]. 
(20) I, even I, know the cords which are on the pole 
‘with curved ends: ‘Cords (?) of the lord of mankind’ 
“lis their name]. I know (21) the name of the table ; 
“*Hand of Isis’ [is its name]. I know the name of 
“its ropes (?); ‘Rope of the god, the firstborn’ [is their 
“name|. (22) I know the name of the cordage (?) ; 
“<Cordage of the day’ [is its name]. I know the 
“names of the fowlers and of the fishermen; (23) 


Ch. cliii.a. 32] OF ESCAPING FROM THE NET 513 


““Alerw gods, ancestors of Ra’ [is their name]. | I 
“know the names of the tememu; ‘Ancestors of Seb’ 
“lis their name |.” 

(24) “I have brought unto thee that which thou 
“eatest, and I have brought that which I eat; and 
‘“‘thou eatest that which Seb eateth with Osiris. Hail, 
“thou ‘god whose face is behind him,’ (25) thou ‘ god 
“who hast gained the mastery over his heart,’ thou 
“fisher and fowler of the opener of the earth! Hail, 
“ye fishers who have given birth to your own fathers, 
“(26) and who lay snares within the city of Nefer-sent, 
“take ye me not into your net, and snare ye me not 
“with the (27) snares wherewith ye ensnared the help- 
“Jess fiends and wherewith ye caught the abominable 
“earth-followers ; for I know the Net. (28) I know 
“the upper framework (?) and the lower heavy parts 
“thereof. Behold me, then, for I have come, I have 
“my pole with curved ends with me, I have my mekhes 
“with me, (29) I have my table with me, and I have 
“my slaughtering knife with me. I have come, and I 
“have entered in, and I have myself pressed forward (?). 
“ Know ye that I, even (30) I, know the name of the 
“snarer of (or that which snareth) fowl [in] his place ? 
“T have smitten [it], I have opened [it] out, 1 have 
“struck [it], and I have set it upon its seat. Now the 
“mekhes which is with me is (31) the ‘Thigh of the 
“ood Nemu’; and the pole with curved ends which is 
“with me is the ‘Finger of Sekeri’; and the table 
“which is with me is the ‘Hand of Isis’; (82) and the 

Wore LL U 


514 OF ESCAPING FROM THE NET (Ch. cliii-a. 33 


“slaughtering knife which is with me is the ‘ Slaughter- 
“ing knife of the god Nemu.’ O grant that I may 
“come; O grant, then, that I may sit (33) in the boat 
“of Ra; let me sail forth on the Lake of Testes (?) 
“towards the northern heaven; let me do as do they 
“who sing when they sing praises (34) of my ka; and 
“Jet me live as do they there. The Osiris Nu, trium- 
“phant, cometh forth upon your ladder which Ra hath 
“made for him, (35) and Horus and Suti hold him fast 
“by the hand.” 


In the Saite Recension (see Lepsius, op. cit., Bl. 74), 
the following rubric is added to this Chapter : 


{This chapter] shall be recited over a figure of the deceased 
which shall be put in a boat. And behold, thou shalt make a 
sektet boat on his right side, and a matet boat on his left, and 
let them bring offerings of cakes, and of ale, and of all kinds of 
fair things on the day of the birth of Osiris. The soul of him 
to whom these things have been given shall live for ever, and 
he shall not die a second time. 


Ch. clip] OF ESCAPING THE CATCHER OF FISH 5r5 


CHAPTER CLIIIs. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 20). ] 


ne 
Ashe 


Vignette: A net full of fish being drawn together by three 
dog-headed apes. 


Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF COMING FORTH FROM 
THE CATCHER OF THE FISH. The Osiris Nu, the over- 
seer of the house of the overseer of the seal, triumphant, 
saith :— (2) 

“ Hail, ye who lay snares (?), and ye who work the 
‘nets, and ye who are fishers; hail, ye who have given 
“birth to your own fathers, know ye (3) that I know 
“the name of the great and mighty net? ‘Anget’ 
“‘(i.e., Clincher) is its name. Know ye that I know 
“(4) the name of its cordage? ‘Ruf (i.e., Vigour) of 
“Tsis’ [is its name]. Know ye that I know the name 
“of the (5) mehes? ‘Thigh of Tem’ [is its name]. 
“Know ye that I know the name of its pole with 
“curved ends? ‘Finger of Nemu’ [is its name]. (6) 


516 OF ESCAPING THE CATCHER OF FISH [Ch cliii.s. 13 


“ Know ye that I know the name of its table? ‘Hook 
“of Ptah’ [is its name]. Know ye that I know (7) 
“the name of its slaughtering knife? ‘Chopper of 
“Tsis’ [is its name]. Know ye that I know the 
“name of its weights? ‘Iron (8) in heaven’ [is their 
“name]. Know ye that I know the name of [its] 
“yushes? ‘Feathers (or hair) of the Hawk’ [is their 
“name]. Know ye (9) that I know the name of the 
“fishers? ‘Ape’ [is their name]. Know ye (10) that 
‘“T know the name of the Thigh? [‘ Thigh] whereon 
“standeth the Temple of the Moon’ is its name. Know 
“ve that (11) I know the name of the fowler? ‘ Prince, 
“mighty one who sitteth on the eastern side of heaven’ 
“lis his name]. I have not eaten, O great divine one. 
“‘(12) Behold, the great divine one hath given me 
“drink; I have not seated myself upon [my] thighs 
“lin| the waters, but I eat and I satisfy myself with 
“food before him. (13) The-seeds of death are in my 
“body. Iam Nekh, Iam Ra, coming forth from Nu, 
‘the divine soul of the god. JI create the god (14) 
“TIu; and wrong is the thing which I abominate. I 
“am Osiris, the maker of Maat whereon Ra doth live 
“each and every day. (15) I am invoked [by the name 
“of | ‘Bull,’ and I am addressed among the company of 
“the gods by the name of ‘Neh.’ I create mine own 
“self along with Nu in my name (16) of Khepera, 
“whereby I create myself each and every day. I am 
“the god of divine splendour, and I rise up as Ra, the 
“lord of the East; life is given unto me through his 


Ch. cliii.s.20o] OF ESCAPING THE CATCHER OF FISH LT 


“(17) comings forth therefrom. I have come into 
“heaven, and I embrace my seat which is in the East 
“with the children of the princes who dwell (18) in 
[their] fields, and I have delivered her that brought 
“me forth in peace. I eat like the god Shu, I satisfy 
“myself with food like the god Shu, (19) I ease myself 
“like the god Shu. The divine kings of the North 
“and South are with me, the god Khensu is with me, 
“and those who bind up their heads are with me; 
“embrace ye, then, (20) the flame in the land of the 
“multitude.” 


CHAPTER CLIV. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477; sheet 18). ] 


Vignette: This Chapter has no vignette in the Theban 

Recension ; in the Saite Recension (see Lepsius, op. cit., Bl. 75) 

the mummy of the deceased is seen lying upon a bier with the 
sun shining upon it. 


518 OF NOT LETTING THE BODY PERISH WiGiaci., « 


Text: (1) Tur CHAPTER OF NOT LETTING THE 
BODY PERISH. The Osiris Nu, the overseer of the 
house of the overseer of the seal, triumphant, 
saith :— (2) 

“Homage to thee, O my divine father Osiris. I 
“came to embalm thee, do thou embalm these my 
“members, for I would not perish and come to an 
“end (3) [but would be] even like unto my divine 
“father Khepera, the divine type of him that never 
“saw corruption. Come, then, make strong my breath, 
“then, O lord of the winds, (4) who dost magnify those 
‘divine beings who are like unto himself. Stablish 
“me doubly, then, and fashion me strongly, O lord of 
“the funeral chest._ Grant thou that I may enter into 
“the land of everlastingness, according to that which 
‘was done for thee (5) along with thy father Tem, 
‘“whose body never saw corruption, and who is the 
“being who never saw corruption. I have never done 
“that which thou hatest, nay, I have cried out among 
‘those who love (6) thy Ka. Let not my body become 
‘worms, but deliver me as thou didst thyself. I pray 
“thee, let me not fall into rottenness even as thou dost 
“permit (7) every god, and every goddess, and every 
‘“‘animal, and every reptile to see corruption when the 
“soul hath gone forth from them after their death. 
‘‘And when the soul departeth (or perisheth), a man 
“seeth corruption and the bones (8) of his body rot 
“and become wholly stinkingness, the members decay 
“piecemeal, the bones crumble into a helpless mass, 


Ch. cliv. 16] OF NOT LETTING THE BODY PERISH 51g 


“and the flesh becometh foetid liquid, (9) and he 
“becometh a brother unto the decay which cometh 
“upon him, and he turneth into multitudes of worms, 
“and he becometh altogether worms, and an end is 
“made of him, and he perisheth in the sight of the 
“ood Shu.even as doth every god, and every goddess 
(10) and every feathered fowl, and every fish, and 
“every creeping thing, and every reptile.......... 
“and every animal, and every thing whatsoever. 'There- 
“fore shall they [fall] on (11) their bellies [when] they 
“recognize me, and behold, the fear of me shall terrify 
“them; and thus likewise shall it be with every being 
“after death, whether it be animal, (12) or bird, or 
“fish, or worm, or reptile. Let life [come] from its 
“death,' and let not decay caused by any reptile make 
“an end [of me], and let them not come against (13) 
“me in their [various] forms. Do not thou give me 
“over unto that slaughterer who dwelleth in his 
“torture-chamber (?), who (14) killeth the members 
“and maketh them rot, being [himself] hidden—who 
“worketh destruction upon many dead bodies and 
“liveth by slaughter. Let me live and perform his 
“message, and let me do that which (15) is com- 
“manded by him. Give me not over unto his fingers, 
“Jet him not gain the mastery over me, for I am under 
“thy command, O lord of the gods.” 

‘“ Homage to thee, O my divine father Osiris, thou 
“hast thy being with thy members. (16) Thou didst 

1 T.e., the death of the body. 


520 OF NOT LETTING THE BODY PERISH [Ch. cliv. 17 


“not decay, thou didst not become worms, thou didst 
“not diminish, thou didst not become corruption, thou 
“didst not putrefy, and thou didst not turn into worms. 
“Tam the god Khepera, and my members shall have 
“an everlasting existence. (17) I shall not decay, I 
“shall not rot, I shall not putrefy, I shall not turn into 
“worms, and I shall not see corruption before the eye 
“of the god Shu. I shall have my being; I shall have 
“my being; (18) I shall live, I shall live; I shall ger- 
“minate, I shall germinate, I shall germinate; I shall 
“wake up in peace; I shall not putrefy; my intes- 
“tines (?) shall not perish; I shall not suffer injury ; 
“(19) mine eye shall not decay; the form of my 
“visage (?) shall not disappear; mine ear shall not 
“become deaf; my head shall not be separated from 
“my neck; my tongue shall not be carried away; my 
“hair shall not (20) be cut off; mine eyebrows shall 
“not be shaved off; and no baleful injury shall come 
“upon me. My body shall be stablished, and it shall 
“neither fall into ruin (21) nor be destroyed on this 
“earth.” 


Chap. clv. ] OF A ‘LEE OF GOLD 


Ot 
tN 
| nl 


CHAPTER CLY. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 27).] 


Vignette: A Jet. 


Text: (1) Tue CHaprer or A Treror coup. The 
Osiris Nu, the overseer of the house of the overseer of 
the seal, saith :— (2) 


“Rise up thou, O Osiris. [Thou hast thy backbone, 
“QO Still-Heart, thou hast the ligatures of thy neck and 
“back, O Still-Heart].'_ Place thou thyself upon thy 
“Dbase. I put water beneath thee, and I bring unto 
“thee a Tet of gold that thou mayest rejoice therein.” 


RUBRIC: [This chapter] shall be recited over a Tet of gold 
set in (3) a plinth (?) of sycamore wood which hath been 
steeped in water of ankham flowers, and it shall be placed at 
the neck of the deceased on the day of the funeral. If this 
amulet be placed at his neck, he shall become a perfect (4) khw 


1 Added from the Papyrus of Nebseni, sheet 10. 


522 OF A BUCKLE*OF CARNELIAN [Chap. clvi. 1. 


in the underworld, and at the new year [festivals he shall be] 
like those who are in the following of Osiris continually and 
for ever.! 


CHAPTER CLYI. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 27). ] 


Vignette: A Buckle. 


Text: (1) THE Cuaprer or A BUCKLE OF CAR- 
NELIAN. The Osiris Nu, the overseer of the house of 
the overseer of the seal, saith :— 

“May the blood of Isis, and the powers of Isis, and 
“the enchantments of Isis be powers to protect (2) 
“this mighty one and to guard him from him that 
“would do unto him anything which he abominateth.” 

1 The Rubric in the Saite Recension (see Lepsius, op. cit., Bl. 75) 
adds :—‘‘ He shall not be thrust back at the doors of Amentet ; 
cakes, and ale, and meat-offerings shall be offered unto him upon 


the altars of Ra, or (as some say) of Osiris Un-nefer; and he shall 
triumph over his foes in the underworld for ever and for eyer.” 


Chap. clvi. 5 | OF A BUCKLE OF CARNELIAN 523 


RUBRIC: [This chapter] shall be said over a buckle of 
carnelian, which hath been steeped -in water of ankhami 
flowers, and set (3) in a plinth of sycamore wood, and it shall 
be placed at the neck of the deceased on the day of the funeral. 
If these things be done for him the powers of Isis (4) shall 
protect his limbs, and Horus the son of Isis shall rejoice in 
him, when he seeth him; and there shall be no hidden places 
on his path, and one hand shall be towards heaven, and 
one hand shall be towards earth, regularly and continually. 
(5) Thou shalt not let any person who is with thee see 
LSS. Chir S chen bee 


CHAPTER CLVII. 


iLFrom Lepsius, Todtenbuch, Bl. 76. ] 


— f 
—~ 


NZ: ——7_4 == 
<I SS 


Vignette: A vulture with outstretched wings holding the 
symbol of life in each talon. 


! The Rubric in the Saite Recension (see Lepsius, op. cit., Bl. 75) 
adds :—‘‘ If this Chapter be known [by the deceased] he shall be 
among those who follow Osiris Un-nefer, triumphant. The gates 
of the underworld shall be opened unto him, and a homestead shall 
be given unto him, together with wheat and barley, in the Sekhet- 
Aaru; and the followers of Horus who reap therein shall proclaim 
his name as one of the gods who are therein.” 


24 OF THE AMULET OF THE VULTURE) [G€bvelvi. x. 


Sa 


Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF THE VULTURE OF 
GOLD WHICH IS TO BE PLACED AT THE NECK OF 
THE DECEASED. (2) The Osiris Auf-ankh, triumphant, 
saith :— 

“Tsis cometh and hovereth over the city, and she 
“ooeth about seeking the secret habitations of Horus 
“as he emergeth from his papyrus swamps, and she 
“‘lifteth up his shoulder which is in evil case. He is 
“made one (3) of the company in the divine boat, and 
“the sovereignty of the whole world is decreed for him. 
“He hath warred mightily, and he maketh [his] deeds 
“‘to be remembered; he hath made fear of him to exist, 
“and awe [of him] to have its being. His mother, the 
“mighty lady, protecteth him, and she hath (4) trans- 
“ferred her power to Horus.” 

RUBRIC: [This chapter] shall be said over a vulture of 
gold whereupon it hath been inscribed, and thou shalt place 


the vulture on the neck to protect the perfect deceased one on 
the day of the funeral continually and regularly. 


Chap. clviii. 2] OF THE “COLLAR OF GOLD ay? 


On 


CHAPTER CLVIII. 


[From Lepsius, Todtenbuch, Bl. 76. ] 


> 
2 
> 
W 


¢ 
oS 
ris 


Vignette: A collar. 


Text: (1) THe CHAPTER oF A COLLAR OF GOLD 
which shall be placed at the neck of the deceased. 
(2) The Osiris Auf-ankh, triumphant, saith :— 


“QO my father, my brother, my mother Isis, I am 
“unswathed, and I see. I am one of those who are 
“unswathed and who see the god Seb.” 


RUBRIC: [This chapter] shall be said over a collar of gold 
whereon it hath been engraved, and the collar shall be placed 
on the neck of the deceased on the day of the funeral. 


Sal 
nN 
OV 


OF THE, AMULET OF THE) UAT CGH eemithrche 1. 


CHAPTER CLIX. 


{From Lepsius, Todtenbuch, Bl. 76.] 


Vignette: The UVatch amulet. 


Text: (1) THe Carrer oF THE UATCH AMULET 
[MADE OF| MOTHER-OF-EMERALD which shall be placed 
at the neck of the deceased. (2) The Osiris Auf-ankh, 
triumphant, saith :— 


“ Hail, thou who comest forth daily from the Temple 
“of the god. The mighty lady speaketh and she goeth 
‘round about in the gate of the double house, and she 
“taketh possession of the might of her father, that is 
“to say, the Sahu (3) [who is] the bull of the goddess 
‘“Renenet. She taketh those who are in her following, 
“and she maketh an opportunity for those, the oppor- 
“tunity of the door (?).” 


RUBRIC: [This chapter] shall be said over an Uatch ot 
mother-of-emerald whereupon it hath been inscribed, and the 
Uatch shall be placed on the neck of the deceased. 


END OF VOL. II. 


. 


LONDON: : . 
PRINTED BY GILBERT AND RIVINGTON, LIMITED, 
87, JOHN'S HOUSE, CLERKENWELL, 1.C, 


Catalogue of Publications 


of the 
Open Court Publishing Company 
Chicago, Monon Building, 324 Dearborn St. 


London, Kegan Paul, Trench, Triibner & Co, 


SUNDARA ROW, T. 
GEOMETRICAL EXERCISES IN PAPER-FOLDING. 
With Half-Tones from Photographs of Exercises. Pages, x + 148. 
Cloth, $1.00 net (4s. 6d. net). 


COPE, E. D: 
THE PRIMARY FACTORS OF ORGANIC EVOLUTION, 
rz1cuts. Pp. xvi, 547. Cloth, $2.00 (10s.). 


MULLER, F. MAX. 
THREE INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON THE SCIENCE OF 


THOUGHT. 
128 pages. Cloth, 75c (3s. 6d.). 


THREE LECTURES ON THE SCIENCE OF LANGUAGE, 
112 pages. 2nd Edition. Cloth, 75c (3s. 6d.). 


ROMANES, GEORGE JOHN. 
DARWIN AND AFTER DARWIN. 
Three Vols., $4.00. Singly, as follows: 
1. THE DARWINIAN THEORY. 460 pages. 125 illustrations. Cloth, $2.00. 
2. Post-DARWINIAN QuEsTIONS. Heredity and Utility. Pp. 338. $1.50. 
3. Post-DarwINIAN QuEsTions. Isolation and Physiological Selection. 
Pp. 181. $1.00. 


AN EXAMINATION OF WEISMANNISM. 
236 pages. Cloth, $1.00. 


THOUGHTS ON RELIGION. 
Third Edition, Pages, 184. Cloth, gilt top, $1.25. 


SHULE, DRI DA KERHOOT, 
FIRST BOOK IN ORGANIC EVOLUTION. 
9 colored plates, 39 cuts. Pp. xvi+285. Price, $2.00 (7s. 6d.). 


MACH, ERNST. 
THE SCIENCE OF MECHANICS. 
pene yy T. J. McCormack. 2nded. z2s5ocuts. 540 pages. $1.75 net 
(7s. 6d.). 


POPULAR SCIENTIFIC LECTURES. 
Third Edition. 415 pages. 59 cuts. Cloth, gilt top. $1.50 (7s. 6d.). 


THE ANALYSIS OF THE SENSATIONS. 
Pp. 208. 37 cuts. Cloth, $1.25 (6s. 6d.). 


LAGRANGE, JOSEPH LOUIS. 
LECTURES ON ELEMENTARY MATHEMATICS. 
With portrait of the author. Pp. 172. Price, $1 00 (5s.). 


DE MORGAN, AUGUSTUS. 
ON THE STUDY AND DIFFICULTIES OF MATHEMATICS. 
New Reprint edition with notes. Pp. viii+288. Cloth, $1.25 (5s.). 


ELEMENTARY ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE DIFFERENTIAL AND 
INTEGRAL CALCULUS. 
New reprint edition, Price, $1.00 (55.). 


FINK, KARL. 
A BRIEF HISTORY OF MATHEMATICS. 
Trans. by W. W. Beman and D. E. Smith. Pp., 333. Cloth, $1.50 (5s.6d.). 


SCHUBERT, HERMANN. 
MATHEMATICAL ESSAYS AND RECREATIONS. 
Pp. 149. Cuts, 37. Cloth, 75c (3s. 6d.). 


HUC AND GABET, MM. 
TRAVELS IN TARTAR\, THIBET AND CHINA. 
roo engravings. Pp 28+660. 2 vols, $2.00 (10s.). Onevol., $1.25 (5s.). 


CARUS, PAUL. 
THE HISTORY OF THE DEVIL, AND THE IDEA OF EVIL. 
311 Illustrations. Pages, 500. Price, $6.00 (30S.). 
THE CROWN OF THORNS. 
A Story of the Time of Christ. Illustrated. Pages, 73. Cloth, 75c 
net (3s. 6d, net). 
EROS AND PSYCHE. 
After Apuleius. Illustrations by Paul Thumann. Pp. 125. Cl., $1.50 (6s.). 
WHENCE AND WHITHER? 
An Inquiry into the Nature of the Soul. 196 pages. Cloth, 75c (3s. 6d.). 
THE ETHICAL PROBLEM. 
Second edition, revised and enlarged. 351 pages. Cloth, $1.25 (6s. 6d.). 
FUNDAMENTAL PROBLEMS. 
Second edition, revised and enlarged. 372 pp. Cl., $1.50 (7s. 6d.). 
HOMILIES OF SCIENCE. 
317 pages. Cloth, Gilt Top, $1.50 (7s. 6d.). 
THE IDEA OF GOD. 
Fourth edition. 32 pages. Paper, 15c (9d.). 
THE SOUL OF MAN. 
anded, 182cuts. 482 pages. Cloth, $1.50 (6s. net), 
THE CHIEF’S DAUGHTER. 
A Legend of Niagara. Illustrated. Pp. 54. Cloth, $1.00. 
TRUTH IN' FICTION. Twetve Taves witH A MoRAL. 
White and gold binding, giltedges. Pp. i111. $1.00 (5s.). 
THE RELIGION OF SCIENCE, 
Second, extra edition. Pp. 103, Cloth, 50c (2s. 6d.). 
PRIMER OF PHILOSOPHY 
240 pages. Third Edition. Cloth, $1.00 (5s.). 
THE GOSPEL OF BUDDHA. According to Old Records. 
Sixth Edition. Pp. 275. Cloth, $1.00 (5s.). In German, $1.25 (6s. 6d.). 
BUDDHISM AND ITS CHRISTIAN CRITICS. 
Pages, 311. Cloth, $1.25 (6s. 6d.). 
KARMA. A Story oF EARLY BUDDHISM, 
Illustrated by Japanese artists. Crépe paper, 75c (3s. 6d.). 
NIRVANA: A Srory oF BuppHist PsyCcHOLoGy. 
Japanese edition, like Karma, $1.00 (4s. 6d.). 
LAO-TZE’S TAO TEH KING. 
Chinese-English. Pp. 360. Cloth, $3.00 (15s.). 


CORNIEE, CAR LSHEINKTCH: 
THE PROPHETS OF ISRAEL. 
Pp., 200, Cloth, $1.00 (5s.). 
HISTORY OF THE PEOPLE OF ISRAEL. 
Pp. vi+325. Cloth, $1.50 (7s. 6d.), 


POWELE, Ja WwW. 
TRUTH AND ERROR; or,.the Science of Intellection, 
Pp. 423.. Cloth, $1.75 (7s. 6d.). 


RIBOte Cos 
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF ATTENTION, 
THE DISEASES OF PERSONALITY. 
THE DISEASES OF THE WILL. f 
Cloth, 75 cents each (3s. 6d.), Fudd set, cloth, $1.75 (9S.). 
EVOLUTION OF GENERAL IDEAS, 
Pp, 231. Cloth, $1.25 (5s.). 


BUDGE, DR: E. A. WALLIS. 


THE BOOK OF THE DEAD. 
3 vols. 420 new vignettes. Crown 8vo. Cloth, $3.75 net. 


HUTCHINSON, WOODS. 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO DARWIN. 
Pp. xii+241. Price, $1.50 (6s.). 
FREYTAG, GUSTAV. 
THE LOST MANUSCRIPT. A Novel. 
2 vols. 953 pages. Extra cloth, $4.00 (21s). One vol., cl., $1.00 (5s.). 


MARTIN LUTHER. 
Illustrated. Pp. 130. Cloth, $1.00 (5s.). 


ACVAGHOSHA. 
DISCOURSE ON THE AWAKENING OF FAITH in the Mah4yana. 
From the Chinese by T. Suzuki. Pp., 176. Cl., $1.25 (5s. 6d.). 


TRUMBULL, M. M. 
THE FREE TRADE STRUGGLE IN ENGLAND. 
Second Edition, 296 pages. Cloth, 75c (3s. 6d.). 


WHEELBARROW: ARTICLES AND DISCUSSIONS ON THE LABOR QUESTION. 
With portrait of the author, 303 pages. Cloth, $1.00 (5s.). 


GOETHE AND SCHILLER'’S XENIONS. 
Translated by Paul Carus. Album form. Pp. 162. Cl., $1.00 (5s.). 


OLDENBERG, H. 
ANCIENT INDIA: ITS LANGUAGE AND RELIGIONS. 
Pp. 110. Cloth, 50c (2s. 6d.). 


CONWAY, MONCURE D. 
SOLOMON, AND SOLOMONIC LITERATURE. 
Pp. 243. Cloth, $1.50 (6s.). 
DEDEKIND, R. 


ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF NUMBER. 
Trans. by W. W. Beman. Pp. 115. Cl., 75 cents (3s. 6d.). 


GARBE, RICHARD. 
THE REDEMPTION OF THE BRAHMAN. A Tate oF Hinpu LIFE. 
Laid paper. Gilt top. 96 pages. Price, 75c (3s. 6d.). 
THE PHILOSOPHY OF ANCIENT INDIA. 
Pp. 89. Cloth, 50c (2s. 6d.). 


HUEPPE, FERDINAND. 
THE PRINCIPLES OF BACTERIOLOGY, 
28 Woodcuts. Pp. x +467. Price, $1.75 (9s.). 


LEVY-BRUHL, PROF. L. 
HISTORY OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY IN FRANCE. 
23 Portraits. Handsomely bound. Pp. 500, Price, $3.00 (12s.), 


TOPINARD, DR. PAUL. 
SCIENCE AND FAITH. 
Pp. 374. Cloth, $1.50 (6s. 6d.). 


BINET, ALFRED. 
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF REASONING. 
Pp. 193. Cloth, 75c (3s. 6d.). 
THE PSYCHIC LIFE OF MICRO-ORGANISMS. 
Pp. 135. Cloth, 75c (3s. 6d.). 


N. B. Send for our large ILLUSTRATED CATALOGUE, contain- 
ing full details of our publications and of our two magazines, /he 
Open Court and The Monist. 


The Religion of Science Library. 


Bi-monthly reprints of standard works, philosophical classics, etc. Yearly, 


$1.50. 
No. na 


Separate copies according to prices quoted, 


The Religion of Science. By Paut Carus. 25¢ (18. 6d.). 


2. Three Introductory Lectures on the. Science of Thought. By F, Max 


MULLER. 25c (1S. 6d.,). 


. Three Lectures on the Science of Language, F. MAX MbLLER, 25¢ (1s.6d.). 


The Diseases of Personality, By Tu. Riso. 25¢ (1s. 6d.). 


. The Psychology of Attention. By TH. Risot. 25c (1s. 6d.). 
. The Psychic Life of Micro-Organisms, By ALFRED BiNET. 25¢ (18. 6d,). 


The Nature of the State. By Paut Carus. 15¢ (9d.). 


. On Double Consctousness, By ALFRED BINET. 15C (9d.). 

. Fundamental Problems, By Paut Carus. 50¢ (2s. 6d,). 

. The Diseases of the Will, By Tu. Ripor. 25¢ (1s. 6d.), 

. The Origin of Language. By Lupwic Notre. 15¢ (9d.). 

. The Free Trade Struggle in England. M.M. TRUMBULL. 25¢ (1s. 6d.). 
. Wheelbarrow on the Labor Question, By M. M. TRUMBULL. 35¢ (2S.). 

. The Gospel of Buddha. By Paut Carus. 35€ (2S.). 

. The Primer of Philosophy, By Paut Carus. 25¢ (1s. 6d.). 

. On Memory, and The Specific Energies of the Nervous System. By PRor. 


Ewacp HERING. 15c (9d.). 


. The Redemption of the Brahman, Tale of Hindu Life. By RicHarD 


GARBE, 25¢ (1S. 6d.). 


. An Examination of Wetsmannism,. By G. J. ROMANES. 35€ (2S.). 

. On Germinal Selection. By AUGUST WEISMANN. 25C (1S. 6d.). 

. Lovers Three Thousand Years Ago. By T. A. Goopwin. (Out of print.) 
. Popular Scientific Lectures. By Ernst Macu. 50c (2s. 6d.), 

. Ancient India: Its Language and Religions, By H. OLDENBERG. 25C 


(1s. 6d.). 


. The Prophets of Israel. By Pror. C. H. Cornity. 25¢ (1. 6d.). 

. Homilies of Science. By Paut Carus. 35€ (2S.). 

. Thoughts on Religion. By G. J. ROMANES. 50 (2s. 6d.). 

. The Philosophy of Ancient India. By Pror. RicHARD GARBE. 25€ (IS, 6d.). 
. Martin Luther. By Gustav FREyTAG. 25¢ (1S. 6d.). 

. English Secularism, By GEorGE JaAcoB HoLyoakE. 25¢ (1s. 6d.). 

. On Orthogenests, By TH. EIMER. 25¢ (ts. 6d.). 

. Chinese Philosophy. By PAut Carus. 25c (1s. 6d.). 

. The Lost Manuscrift. By Gustav FREyTAG, 60c (3s.), 

. A Mechanico-Physiological Theory of Organic Evolution, By CARL Von 


NAEGELI, 15c (9d.). 


. Chinese Fiction. By Dr. GEorGE T, CANDLIN. 15¢ (9d.). 

. Mathematical Essays and Recreations. By H. SCHUBERT. 25¢ (1S. 6d.). 
. The Ethical Froblem. By Paut Carus. 500¢ (2s. 6d.). 

. Buddhism and Its Christian Critics, By PaAut Carus. 50¢ (2s, 6d.). 

. Psychology for Beginners, By Htram M, STANLEY. 200 (Is.). 

. Discourse on Method, By DESCARTES. 25c (rs. 6d.). 

. The Dawn of a New Era, By Paut Carus. 15c (9d.). 

. Kant and Spencer, By Paut Carus. 20€ (Is.). 

. The Soul of Man. By Paut Carus. 75¢ (3s. 6d.). 

. World's Congress Addresses. By C. C. Bonney. 19c (9d.). 

. The Gospel According to Darwin. By Woops HuTcHINSON. 50¢ (2s. 6d.). 
. Whence and Whither, By Faut Carus. 25c (1s. 6d.). 

. Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding. By Davip HUME. 25¢ 


(1s. 6d.). 


. Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals. By Davin HuME, 25¢ 


(1s. 6d.). 


. The Psychology of Reasoning. By ALFRED BINET. 25€ (1s. 6d.). 
. The Principles of Human Knowledge. By GEORGE BERKELEY. 25¢ (1S.6d.). 
. Three Dialogues Between Hylas and Philonous, By GEORGE BERKELEY. 


25c (1s. 6d.). 


. Public Worship: A Study in the Psychology of Religion. By Joun P. 


Hy an. 25c (1s. 6d.). 


. Descartes’ Meditations, with Selections from the Principles. 35c (2s.)- 
. Kant's Prolegomena, 50c (2s. 6d.), (In preparation.) 


The Open Court Publishing Company 


ve 


Lat 


ah 


GAYLORD 


£ 


2 ; - ” 


For renewals cali (210) 649425088 


ae) 

on 

=) 
a 
io] 


yee re 

ae —— r3 
. sane oe 
<< reg 


Robert Collyer Fand. 
Accession Nol #599. oh 


PUBLISHERS - NOTE 


eee ess 


Messrs. Kecan Pau, Trencu, Trusner & Co., Lirp., beg to 
announce that they have still in stock a limited number of the 
larger edition of the hieroglyphic text and translation of the 
Theban Recension of the Book of the Dead, with the hiero- 
glyphie vocabulary by Dr. Wattis Bupas, which appeared in 
three volumes under the title “ CHapTER or Comine Fortu 
BY Day,” late in 1897. 


Price for the Entire Work, £2 10s. 


Votume I. contains all the known Chapters of the Theban 
Recension of the Book of the Dead, printed in hieroglyphic 
type (pp. 1—417), and a description of the papyri in the British 
Museum from which they have been edited, and a list of 
Chapters, etc. (pp. 1.-xl.).. This edition is the most complete 
which has hitherto been published. 


Vo tume II. contains a full vocabulary (pp. 1—886) to all the 
hieroglyphic texts of the Chapters of the Theban Recension of 
the Book of the Dead and to the supplementary Chapters 
from the Saite Recension which are given therewith in Volume 
I. The volume contains about 35,000 references. 


VotumeE IIT. contains :— 
Preface and list of Chapters (i.-xxxvi.). 
1. INTRODUCTION (pp. Xxxvil.-cciv.) :— 

Chap. I—The History of the Book of the Dead. This 
Chapter is accompanied by eighteen plates which illus- 
trate the paleography of the various Recensions of the 
Book of the Dead from the Vth Dynasty to the Roman 
Period. 

VOL, III. A 


hap. II.—Osiris and the Resurrection. 

5 T11.—The Judgment of the Dead. 

5; IV.—The Elysian Fields or Heaven. With extracts 
from the Pyramid Texts. 

= V.—The Magic of the Book of the Dead. 

- V1I.—The Object and Contents of the Book of the Dead. 

. Vil.—The Book of the Dead of Nesi-Khonsu, about 
B.c. 1000 (English translation). 

.»  WII.—The Book of Breathings (English translation). 

. TX.—The Papyrus of Takhert-puru-abt (English 
translation), 


2. ENetisH TRANSLATION OF THE BOOK OF THE DEAD 
(pp. 1—354). The volume also contains three scenes from the 
famous Papyrus of Ani representing the Judgment Scene, the 
Funeral Procession, and the Elysian Fields, which have been 
reproduced in full colours by Mr. W. Griggs, the eminent 
photo-lithographer, 


BOOKS ON 
EGYPT AND CHALDAEA 


By A. EK. WALLIS BUDGE, M.A., Lirr.D., D.Lrz. 


Keeper of the Egyptian and Assyrian Antiquities in 
the British Museum 


AND 


L. W. KING, M.A. 


Assistant in the Department of Egyptian and Assyrian Antiquities in 
the British Museum 


Crown Svo, 3s. 6d. net each. 


Vol. I—Egyptian Religion : Egyptian Ideas of a Future 

Life. By E. A. Wats Buper. 

fe Ij.—Egyptian Magic. By EH. A. Watts Bupas. 

»  IiIl—Egyptian Language: Easy Lessons in Egyptian 
Hieroglyphics. By EH. A. Wattis Bunge. 

,» 1V.—Babylonian Religion: Babylonian Religion and 
Mythology. By L. W. Kine. 

ie V.—Assyrian Language; Hasy Lessons in the Cunei- 
form Inscriptions. By L. W. Krve. 

Vols. VI—VIII.—The Book of the Dead; An English 
Translation of the Theban Recension, with 
supplementary Chapters, Hymns, etc, and 
420 Vignettes which do not appear in the 
larger edition published in 1897. By E. A. 
Wats Bunce. 


The above volumes are now ready, and will be followed by:— 

Vol. I[X.—Mesopotamian Magic: A Study of Babylonian 
Sorcery and Witchcraft. By L. W. Kine. 

X.—The Rosetta Stone. By EH. A. Wattis Bunes. 


” 


LONDON | 
KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER & CO., Lop. 
PATERNOSTER Hovusn, CHARING Cross RoApD 


1901 


Books on Egypt and Chaldaeca 


Vou. Vill” OFS THE SERIES 


eho OR Ome i era) 


ENGLISH TRANSLATION IN THREE VOLUMES 
Wier, JUG 


GHAP TE RSECLX_CXC. 


PUBLISH ERS ANOLE 


SSE 


In the year 1894 Dr. Wallis Budge prepared fur Messrs. Kegan 
Paul, Trench, Triibner & Co. an elementary work on the 
Egyptian language, entitled “ First Steps in Egyptian,” and two 
years later the companion volume, “An Egyptian Reading 
Book,” with transliterations of all the texts printed in it, and 
a full vocabulary. The success of these works proved that 
they had helped to satisfy a want long felt by students of the 
Egyptian language, and as a similar want existed among 
students of the languages written in the cuneiform character, 
Mr. L. W. King, of the British Museum, prepargd on the same 
lines as the two hooks mentioned above, an elementary work on 
the Assyrian and Babylonian languages (“ First. Steps in 
Assyrian”), which appeared in 1898. These works, however, 
dealt mainly with the philological branch of Egyptology and 
Assyriology, and it was impossible in the space allowed to 
explain much that needed explanation in the other branches of 
these subjects—that is to say, matters relating to the archew- 
ology, history, religion, etc., of the Egyptians, Assyrians, and 
Babylonians. In answer to the numerous requests which have 
been made, a series of short, popular handbooks on the most 
important branches of Egyptology and Assyriology have been 
prepared, and it is hoped that these will serve as introductions 
to the larger works on these subjects. The present is the 
eighth volume of the series, and the succeeding volumes will 
be published at short intervals, and at moderate prices. 


Books on Eaypt and Chaldaea 


THE 


BOOK OF THE DEAD 


AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION OF THE CHAPTERS, 
HYMNS, ETC., OF THE THEBAN RECENSION, 
Wi SIN TROD CTION SNOPES SE LC: 


DING 
Pea WALLIS” BUDGE, M.A, LirtD., D,Lrr. 


KEEPER OF THE EGYPTIAN AND ASSYRIAN ANTIQUITIES 
IN THE BRITISH MUSEUM 


WITH FOUR HUNDRED & TWENTY VIGNETTES 


CHICAGO 

THE OPEN COURT -PUBLISHING CO. Ltp. 
LONDON 

KEGAN PAUL, ee &. CO. LTD. 


a 
2 as 
eae 
UH 
a 
Ot eh 4 
ZAzA 8 
g 2° 3 
el es 
: Oo # a 
aoe 
a0 
5: 
n 
E as 
ie 2 
Se, 
: 35 
a 


“i 


| 
; 


»? 
2 
o% 
ysaed A 
o 9 399 won 
99, 7, D597 2) 2s 
o 
a0, 2 
329 
a? 


a! 


mh, TOY 


a 


CONTENT S2ORCY OLUME -IIT 


CHAP, 
CLX.—TuHE CHAPTER OF GIVING AN UATCH AMULET 


TO THE DECEASED. With vignette 
CLXI.—TuHr CuaptER OF FORCING AN ENTRANCE INTO 
_ HEAVEN. With vignette : : 
CLXII.—Tuer CHAPTER OF MAKING HEAT TO BE UNDER 
THE HEAD OF THE DECEASED. With vig- 
nette H : : j F 
CLXIIT.--Tur CHAPTER OF NOT ALLOWING THE BODY OF 
A MAN TO MOULDER AWAY IN THE UNDER- 
worLp. With vignette : 
CLXIV.—AnNoTHER CHAPTER. With vignette 
CLXV.—THE CHAPTER OF ARRIVING IN PORT. With 
vignette : A 
CLXVI.—TuHE CHAPTER OF THE Pmtow. With vig- 
nette : 
CXLVII.—Tue CHAPTER OF BRINGING THE Urcnan 
With vignette ; : : ; 
CLXVIII.—[Tue Booxs oF OFFERINGS TO THE GODS OF 
THE QeERTI|. With sixty-three vignettes . 
CLXIX.—THr CHAPTER OF SETTING UP THE FUNERAL 


BED. ‘ P : ; . : 

CLXX.—TueEe CHAPTER OF ARRANGING THE FUNERAL 
BED- . : ; ‘ : : 5 : 

CLXXI.—Tuer CHAPTER OF TYING ON THE GARMENT OF 
Purity 


CLXXII.—Tue PRAISES WHICH ARE TO BE PERFORMED IN 
THE UNDERWORLD 
CLX XITI.—Tue sprecues oF Horus To HIs FATHER Osthie: 
With three vignettes . . ; 


5383 


il CONTENTS OF VOLUME III. 


CLXXIV.—Tux CHAPTER OF CAUSING THE KHU TO COME 
FORTH FROM THE GREAT DOOR. 5 : 
CLXXV.—THE CHAPTER OF NOT DYING A SECOND TIME. 
With vignette : : : 4 
CLXXVI.—TuE CHAPTER OF NOT DYING A SECOND TIME. 
CLXXVII.—TnE CHAPTER OF RAISING UP THE KHU, AND 
OF MAKING THE SOUL TO LIVE IN THE UNDER- 
. WORLD ; : : : 
CLXXVIII.—Tuer CuaprER OF RAISING UP THE DEAD BODY 
CLXXIX.—TuHE CHAPTER OF ADVANCING FROM YESTER- 
DAY AND OF COMING FORTH BY DAY. 
CLXXX.—THE CHAPTER OF COMING FORTH BY DAY, OF 
PRAISING RA IN AMENTET, OF ASCRIBING 
PRAISE UNTO THOSE WHO DWELL IN THE 
TUAT, OF OPENING UP A PATH FOR THE 
PERFECT KHU IN THE UNDERWORLD, OF 
CAUSING HIM TO WALK, OF MAKING LONG 
HIS FOOTSTEPS, OF GOING INTO AND COMING 
FORTH FROM THE UNDERWORLD, AND OF 
PERFORMING TRANSFORMATIONS LIKE A 
LIVING souL. With vignette 
CLXXXI.—THE CHAPTER OF ENTERING IN TO THE 
DIVINE SOVEREIGN CHIEFS OF OSIRIS, AND 
‘TO THE GODS WHO ARE GUIDES IN THE TUAT, 
AND TO THOSE WHO KEEP WARD OVER THEIR 
GATES, AND TO THOSE WHO ARE HERALDS OF 
THEIR HALLS, AND TO THOSE WHO ARE THE 
PORTERS OF THE DOORS AND PYLONS OF 
Awemnver, AND OF MAKING THE TRANS- 
FORMATIONS LIKE A LIVING SOUL; AND OF 
PRAISING OSIRIS AND OF BECOMING THE 
PRINCE OF THE DIVINE SOVEREIGN CHIEFS. 
With vignette : 3 
CLXXXII.—Tur Boox oF sTABLISHING Gate FIRMLY, 
OF GIVING AIR TO THE STILL- HEART, WHILST 
THOTH, REPULSETH THE FOES OF Horvs. 
With vignette 


PAGE 


593 


596 


600 


601 


603 


608 


610 


615 


620 


CONTENTS OF VOLUME III. 


CHAP. 

CLXXXIII—A Hymn or Pratse to Osiris. With 
two vignettes . F ‘ 5 , 
CLXXXTV.—Tur CHAPTER OF BEING NIGH UNTO OstIRISs 
CLXXXV,.—Tue [CHAPTER OF] GIVING PRAISES UNTO 
OSIRIS, AND PAYING HOMAGE UNTO THE 
LORD OF ETERNITY, AND PROPITIATING 
THE GOD IN HIS WILL, AND DECLARING 
THE RIGHT AND TRUTH, THE LORD OF 

WHICH IS UNKNOWN With vignette 

CLXXXVI.—Without title. With two vignettes 
CLXXXVII—Tur CHAPTER OF ENTERING IN UNTO THE 
COMPANY OF THE GODS j 4 
CLXXXVIIT.—Tue [Cuaprer oF] THE GOING IN OF THE 
SOUL TO BUILD AN ABODE AND TO COME 
FORTH BY DAY IN HUMAN FORM : 
CLXXXIX.—Tuer CHAPTER OF NOT LETTING A MAN 
MAKE A JOURNEY BEING HUNGRY, AND OF 
NOT EATING FILTH ‘ 5 5 
CXC.—TnE Book OF MAKING PERFECT THE KuU 

WITHIN RA ; : I 


Book oF THE DEAD oF NESI-KHONSU . 

Book oF BREATHINGS . 

A. Book oF THE DEAD OF THE ROMAN Pinion 
INDEX . 


631 
633 


637 


637 


639 


643 


645 
657 
665 
667 


THE BOOK OF THE DEAD 


CHAPTER CLX.. 


[From the Papyrus of Nebseni (Brit. Mus. No. 9900, sheet 10).] 


Vignette: Thoth, the great god, giving an Uatch amulet of 
mother-of-emerald to the deceased. 


Text: [THe CHarTER oF] GIviING AN UATCH OF 
MOTHER-OF-EMERALD to the scribe Nebseni, trium- 
phant [who saith] :— 

“T am the Uatch of mother-of-emerald which 
“cannot be injured (?), and which the hand of Thoth 
“adoreth ; injury is a thing which I abominate. It 
“ig in sound state and I am in sound state; it is 
“not injured and I am not injured; it is not [worn 

VOL. III. B 


530 OF GIVING THE UATCH AMULET [Chap. clx. 


‘“away| and I am not worn away. The words of 
“Thoth [are at] thy back, O thou who comest in 
“‘neace, O divine Prince of Annu (Heliopolis), thou 
“mighty god who dwellest in the city of Pe. The 
“god Shu advanceth to him and findeth him in the 
“city of Shenmu in his name ‘Neshem’ (7.e., mother- 
“of-emerald) ; he maketh his place in the fortress of 
“the mighty god. The god Tem resteth upon his eye, 
“and his members shall not suffer injury.” ! 


° 


1 In the Saite Recension (see Lepsius, op. cit., Bl. 76) this 
Chapter has a rubric which reads :—‘‘[This Chapter] shall be 
“recited over an Uatch of mother-of-emerald whereupon it hath 
“been inscribed, and the Uatch shall be placed on the neck of the 
“deceased.” 


Chap. clxi.3] OF THE DOORS OF THE WINDS 53 


Sa 


CHAPTER CLXI. 


[From the Papyrus of Nefer-uben-f (see Naville, op. cit., Bl. 184). ] 


Vignette: The god Thoth opening the doors of the four 
winds. 


Texts: (1)> slau 
CHAPTER OF FORCING 
AN ENTRANCE INTO 
HEAVEN. [This] 
Thoth doeth to make 
felicitous [the way for 
him that] would enter 
into the Disk. 


I. [To the Door of the 
west wind.| (2) “Ra 
“liveth, the Tortoise ! 
‘“‘dieth. Pure is the 
“body in the earth, 
“and pure are the 
“bones of Osiris the 


“am-khent,” Nefer- 
—— a “uben-f, triumphant.” 

II, [To the Door of the east wind.] (8) “Ra liveth, 
“the Tortoise dieth.. Sound is he who is in the chest, 


1 Turtle (?). 2 A priestly title. 


532 OF THE DOORS OF THE WINDS  [Chap. clxi. 4 


“who is in the chest, Osiris Nefer-uben-f, triumphant.” 

III. [To the Door of the north wind.] (4) “Ra 
“liveth, the Tortoise dieth. The Osiris Nefer-uben-f, 
“triumphant, is strong in his members, Qebh-sennuf 
“ouardeth them.” 

IV. [To the Door of the south wind.] (5) “Ra 
“liveth, the Tortoise dieth. The bolts (?) are drawn and 
“they pass through his foundation.” 


RUBRIC:! (1) Every sahw for whom these divine figures 
have been painted upon his coffin shall make his way through 
these (2) four entrances into heaven. That of the north wind 
belongeth to Osiris; that of the south wind to Ra; (3) that of 
the west wind to Isis; and that of the east wind to Nephthys. 
Each one of these winds (4) shall breathe into his nostrils as 
he entereth in his daily course. Let none who is outside know 
[this chapter]; (5) itis a great mystery, and those who dwell 
in the swamps (7.¢., the ignorant) know it not. Thou shalt not 
do this in the presence of any person (6) except thy father or 
thy son, or thyself alone; for it is, indeed, an exceedingly (7) 
great mystery which no man whatsoever knoweth. 


1 This Rubric is added from the Saite Recension (see Lepsius, 
op. cit., Bl. 76). 


Chap. clxii.3] OF KEEPING WARM THE HEAD 533 


CHAPTER CLXII. 


[From Lepsius, Todtenbuch, Bl. 77. ] 


Vignette: A cow having the disk with plumes between her 
horns, and wearing the collar, from which is suspended the 
emblem of “ life” round her neck. 


Text: THkE CHAPTER OF MAKING HEAT TO BE 
UNDER THE HEAD OF THE DECEASED. (1) To be 
recited :—‘‘ Homage to thee, O thou god Par, thou 
“mighty one, whose plumes are lofty, thou lord of the 
“ Uyeret crown, who rulest with the whip; thou art the 
“lord of the phallus, thou growest as thou shinest with 
“rays of light, (2) and thy shining is to the uttermost 
“arts [of earth and sky]. Thou art the lord of trans- 
“formations, and hast manifold skins, which thou hidest 
“in the Utchat at its birth. Thou art the mighty one 
“of names (?) among (3) the gods, the mighty runner 
‘“‘whose strides are mighty; thou art the god the 
“mighty one who comest and rescuest the needy one 
“and the afflicted from him that oppresseth him ; give 


534 OF KEEPING WARM THE HEAD [Chap. clxii. 4 


“heed to my cry. I am the Cow, (4) and thy divine 
“name is in my mouth, and I will utter it; ‘ Haqa- 
‘“hakaher’ is thy name; ‘Aurauaa qersaanqrebathi’ 
“(5) is thy name; ‘Kherserau’ is thy name; ‘ Khar- 
“satha’ is thy name. I praise thy name. I am the 
“Cow that hearkeneth unto the petition on the day 
“wherein (6) thou placest heat under the head of Ra. 
“Q place it for him in the divine gate’ in Annu 
(Heliopolis), and thou shalt make him to become 
“even like him that is upon the earth; he is thy soul 
«. ,.. Orbe gracious unto Osiris Auf-ankh, trium- 
“phant, (7) and cause thou heat to exist under his 
“head, for, indeed, he is the soul of the great divine 
“Body which resteth in Annu, Khu-kheper-uru’ (?) is 
“his name; ‘Barekathatchaua’ is his name. Be gra- 
“cious, then, (8) and grant that he may become like 
“unto one of those who are in thy following, for he is 
“even as art thou.” 


RUBRIC: [This chapter] shall be recited over the image of 
acow which hath been made in fine gold. and placed at the neck 
of the deceased, and it shall be written upon (9) new papyrus 
and placed under his head, then shall abundant warmth be in 
him throughout even like that which was in him when he was 
upon earth. This hath exceedingly great protective power, for 
it was made by the cow for her son Ra when he was setting 
and when (10) his habitation was surrounded by a company of 
beings of fire. And the deceased shall become divine in the 
underworld, and he shall never be turned back at any of the 
gates thereof. (11) 


And thou shalt say when thou placest [the image of] this 


! Or ‘‘ underworld,” 


Chap. clxiii.] OF THE PRESERVATION OF THE BODY 535 


goddess at the neck of the deceased :—‘‘O Amen, O Amen, 
“‘who art in heaven, turn thy face upon the dead body of thy 
‘son and make him sound and strong in the underworld.” 
(12) This is a composition of exceedingly great mystery. Let 
not the eye of any man whatsoever see it, for it is an abominable 
thing for [every man] to know it; therefore hide it. “Book of 
the mistress of the hidden temple” is its name. 


Here endeth the Bools.! 


CHAPTER CLXIII. 


[From Lepsius, Todtenbuch, Bl. 77.] 


Vignette : Two winged Utchats on legs, and a serpent also 
upon legs, with a disk and horns upon his head. 


Text: The Chapters which are taken from another 
work and are here added to the “ Book of coming forth 
by day.” 

THE CHAPTER OF NOT ALLOWING THE BODY OF A 
MAN TO MOULDER AWAY IN THE UNDERWORLD, AND 


1 The document from which the scribe of the Turin Papyrus 
copied this Chapter probably ended with it. 


536 OF THE PRESERVATION OF THE BODY [Cnh. clxiii. x 


OF DELIVERING HIM FROM THOSE WHO DEYOUR THE 
SOULS THAT ARE SHUT IN IN THE UNDERWORLD, AND 
OF NOT ALLOWING TO RISE UP AGAINST HIM THE THINGS 
WHICH HE ABOMINATETH UPON EARTH, AND OF MAKING 
SOUND AND STRONG HIS LIMBS AND BONES AGAINST 
WORMS AND AGAINST EVERY GOD WHO WOULD ATTACK 
HIM IN THE UNDERWORLD, AND OF CAUSING HIM TO 
COME FORTH AND TO GO IN AS HE PLEASETH AND TO 
DO WHATSOEVER HE HATH IN HIS HEART TO DO WITH- 
OUT HINDRANCE. (1) The Osiris Auf-ankh, triumphant, 
saith :— 

‘“T am the divine soul of the great divine body which 
‘is laid to rest in Athabu, which protecteth the body 
“of (2) Harethi, the... . which resteth in the marshes 
“of Senhaqareha. O divine soul which hath no languor 
“of heart either in rising (3) or setting, and which 
“yesteth within his divine body which is laid to rest 
“in Senhaparekana, grant thou to Osiris Auf-ankh, 
“triumphant, that he may deliver himself (4) from the 
“souls of the god-of-the-savage-face, who gaineth the 
“mastery over hearts and taketh possession of limbs, 
“and from whose mouths fire cometh forth to devour 
“souls. Hail, thou who art lying prostrate within thy 
“body, whose flame (5) cometh into being from out of 
“the fire which blazeth within the sea (or water) in 
“such wise that the sea (or water) is raised up on high 
“out of the fire thereof, grant thou that the flame (6) 
“may leave the fire, wherever it may be, to raise up 
“the hand of Osiris Auf-ankh, triumphant, and to make 


Ch, clxiii, 13] OF THE PRESERVATION OF THE BODY 537 


“him to have an existence for ever and for ever. Verily, 
“let his period of existence be as the period of existence 
“(7) of heaven in the limitless boundaries thereof. 
“Heaven holdeth thy soul, O Osiris Auf-ankh, and 
“earth holdeth thy form. O deliver thou Osiris Auf- 
“ankh, triumphant, and let him not be [consumed] by 
“the kauwi (8) who devour the souls of those who have 
“raised up evil (?). Let his soul have its being within 
“his body, and let his body have its being with his 
“soul; and let him be hidden within the pupil of the 
“ Utchat of the god whose name is Sharei-sharei-shapu- 
“neter-ari(9)-ka, who reposeth at the northwest of the 
“brow of the Apt of the land of Kenset (Nubia), and 
‘“journeyeth not to the east. Hail, god Amen, thou 
“divine Bull-Scarab, (10) thou lord of the divine 
“Utchats |! God-the-pupil-of-whose-eye-is-terrible is 
“thy name, the Osiris Auf-ankh, triumphant, born of 
“Sheret-Amsu, triumphant, is the emanation of thy 
“two Hyes, the name of one of which is Share-share- 
“‘khet, and (11) Shapu-neteér-ari-ka of the other, though 
“« Shaka-Amen-Shakanasa at the brow of Tem who illu- 
‘“‘mineth the two lands’ (12) is his name in very truth. 
“Grant that Osiris Auf-ankh, triumphant, may be of 
“this land of Maat, let him not be left in his solitude, 
“for he is of this earth wherein he will no [more] 
“appear, and ‘An’ (13) is his name. O let him be 
“with a perfect Khu, or (as others say), a strong Khu, 
“and let him be the soul of the mighty body which is 
“in Sau (Sais), the city of Neith.” 


538 OF THE PRESERVATION OF THE BODY [Ch. dlxiii. x4 


RUBRIC: [This chapter] is to be recited over a serpent 
having legs and wearing (14) a disk and two horns, and over 
two Utchats having both eyes and wings. In the pupil of one 
of the Utchats there shall be a figure of the god-of-the-lifted- 
hand with the face of the divine soul, and having plumes and a 
back (15) like a hawk; and in the pupil of the other there shall 
be a figure of the god-of-the-lifted-hand with the face of the 
goddess Neith, and having plumes and a back like a hawk. 
And this chapter shall be written with anti either upon a meh 
stone....or upon mother-of-emerald (16) of the south and 
[dipped] in water of the western lake of Qemt (Egypt) or upon 
a bandage of watchet linen wherewith a man should swathe 
every limb. And the deceased shall not be turned back at any 
gate of the underworld; he shall eat (17) and drink and ease 
himself even as he did when he was upon earth; and none 
shall rise up to cry out against him; and he shall be protected 
from the hands of the enemy for ever and ever. If this book 
be recited for him upon earth he shall not be seized (18) by the 
messengers of attack who work evil in all the earth; he shall 
not have gashes inflicted upon him; he shall not die through 
the slaughter of Set; and he shall not be carried off to any 
place of restraint whatsoever; but he shall go in unto the 
qgenbet, and he shall come forth with triumph, (19) and he shall 
go out to terrify the evil-doers who exist in all the earth. 


Ch. clxiv. 4] OF THE PRESERVATION OF THE BODY 539 


CHAPTER CLXIV. 


[From Lepsius, Todtenbuch, Bl. 78.] 


Vignette: A goddess, with a head of a woman and two 

heads of a vulture, standing with outstretched wings. On 

each side of her is a dwarf with two heads, one of a man and 

one of a hawk; each dwarf has a disk and plumes upon his 
head. 


Text: ANOTHER CHAPTER. 


(1) “Homage to thee, O Sekhet-Bast-Ra, thou 
“mistress of the gods, thou bearer of wings, lady 
“of the Anes bandlet, queen of the crowns of the 
“South and of the North, only One, sovereign of her 
“father, superior to whom the gods cannot be, thou 
“mighty one of enchantments (2) in the Boat of 
“Millions of Years, thou who art. pre-eminent, who 
“visest in the seat of silence, mother of Pashakasa, 
“royal wife of Parehaqa-Kheperu, (3) mistress and 
“Jady of the tomb, mother in the horizon of heaven, 
‘oracious one, beloved, destroyer of rebellion, offerings 
‘are in thy grasp, and thou art standing in the bows 
“of the boat of thy divine father (4) to overthrow the 


540 OF THE PRESERVATION OF THE BODY [Ch. clxiv. 


“Fiend. Thou hast placed Maat in the bows of his 
“boat. Thou art the fire goddess Ami-seshet (?) whose 
“opportunity escapeth her not; thy name is Kaharesa- 
“pusaremkakaremet. (5) Thou art like unto the mighty 
“flame of Saqenagat which is in the bows of the boat 
‘of thy father Harepukaka-share-sha-baiu, (6) for be- 
‘hold, thus is [the name uttered] in the speech of the 
“ Negroes, and of the Anti, and of people of Ta-Kensetet 
(Nubia). Praise be to thee, O lady, who art mightier 
“than the gods, and words of adoration rise to thee 
“from the Hight gods. The living souls who are in 
“their chests (7) praise thy mystery. O thou who art 
“their mother, thou source from whom they sprang, 
“{who| makest for them a place of repose in the hidden 
‘underworld, [who] makest sound their bones and 
“preservest them from terror, (8) who makest them 
“strong (?) in the abode of everlastingness, who pre- 
“servest them from the evil chamber of the souls of 
“the god-of-the-terrible-face [who is] among the com- 
“pany of the gods. ‘Babe that comest forth from the 
“ god-of-the-terrible-face who keepeth his body hidden’ 
“is thy name. (9) ‘ Atare-am-tcher-qemtu-rennu-par- 
“‘sheta’ is the name of one divine son, ‘ Pa-nemma’ [is 
“the name] of the other. ‘Utchat of Sekhet, mighty 
“Jady, (10) mistress of the gods’ is thy name. ‘Eman- 
cea tLOLLMGls, sere "is the name of Mut, who maketh 
“souls strong (?) and who maketh sound bodies, and 
“who delivereth them from the abode of the fiends 
“which is in the evil chamber. (11) The goddess 


Ch. clxiv. 16] OF THE PRESERVATION OF THE BODY 541 


“saith with her own mouth, ‘They shall never be 
“fettered, and I will do according to what ye say, O 
“ye T'chawi of the divine son, for whom they per- 
“formed the funeral rites.’ ” 


RUBRIC: (12) [This chapter] shall be recited over [a figure 
of] Mut which hath three heads; the first shall be like unto 
that of Pekhat, and shall have [upon it] plumes; the second 
shall be like unto that of a man and shall have [upon it] the 
crowns of the South and North; and the third shall be like 
unto that of a vulture and shall have [upon it] plumes. And 
the figure shall have a phallus (13), anda pair of wings, and 
the claws of a lion, and it shall be painted with anf and 
powder (?) of watch mixed (?) with yellow colour (?) upon a 
bandage of anes linen. In front of it shall stand one dwarf, 
and behind it [another]; and (14) [each] shall have upon him 
plumes, and [one] hand and arm shall be raised, and [each ] 
shall have two faces, one of a hawk and one of a man, and the 
body of each shall be fat. [Then shall the deceased] be divine 
along with the gods in the underworld; (15) he shall never, 
never be turned back; his flesh and his bones shall be like 
those of one who hath never been dead; he shall drink water 
at the source of the stream; a homestead shall be given unto 
him in Sekhet-aanre ; (16) he shall become a star of heaven; 
he shall set out against the serpent-fiend Nekau and against 
Tar, who are in the underworld; he shall not be shut in along 
with the souls which are fettered; he shall deliver himself 
wherever he may be; and worms shall not devour him. 


542 OF ARRIVING IN PORT [Chap. clxv. x 


CHAPTER CLXYV. 


[From Lepsius, Todtenbuch, Bl. 79. | 


frag | 


Vignette: An ithyphallic god with the body of a beetle; on 
his head are plumes, and his right hand and arm are raised. 
Behind him is a man who has a ram’s head on each shoulder. 


Text: THE CHAPTER OF ARRIVING IN PORT..... 


To make the body germinate, and to drink water, and 
not to disappear recite the following :— 


(1) “Hail, O Bekhennu, Bekhennu; O Prince, 
“Prince; O Amen, Amen; O Re-Iukasa; O god, 
“Prince of the gods of the eastern part (2) of 
‘heaven, O Amen-Nathekerethi-Amen. O thou whose 
“skin is hidden, whose form is secret, thou lord of the 
TTA UMMOINNES, ph ee S of Nut, thy name is Na-(8)ari-k, 
“or (as others say) ‘Ka-ari-ka.’ ‘Kasaika’ is thy 
“name. ‘Arethikasathika’ is thy name. ‘Amen-na- 
“an-ka-entek-share,’ (4) or (as others say), Thekshare- 


Chap. clxv. 11] OF ARRIVING IN PORT 543 


“ Amen-Rerethi’ is thy name. © Amen, let me make 
“supplication unto thee, I, even I, know thy name. 
“Thy transformations (5) are in my mouth, thy skin 
“is before my eyes. Come, I pray thee, and place thou 
“thy heir and thy image, Osiris Auf-ankh, triumphant, 
“born of Sheret-Amsu, triumphant, (6) in the ever- 
“Jasting underworld. Grant thou that all his members 
“may repose in Neter-khertet (the underworld) or (as 
“ others say) in Akertet (the underworld) ; let his whole 
“body become like that of a god; let him escape from 
“the evil chamber and let him not be imprisoned (7) 
“therein. I adore thy name. Thou hast made for me 
“a skin, and thou hast comprehended [my] speech, and 
“thou knowest it exceedingly well. ‘Amen’ is thy 
“name. O Retasashaka, (8) I have made for thee a 
‘skin, [namely] a divine soul. ‘Ireqai’ is thy name; 
“¢Marqatha’ is thy name; ‘Rerei’ is thy name; 
‘““* Nasaqbubu’ (9) is thy name ; ‘ Thanasa-Thanasa’ is 
“thy name; ‘Shareshathakatha’ is thy name. O 
“Amen, O Amen, O God, O God, O Amen, (10) I 
“adore thy name, grant thou to me that I may com- 
‘“‘prehend thee; grant thou that I may have peace in the 
“Tuat (underworld) and may possess all my members 
“Ttherein]. And the divine Soul which is in Nut (11) 
“saith :— ‘I will make my divine strength to_ protect 
“thee, and I will perform everything which thou hast 
said.” 


RUBRIC: [This chapter] shall be recited over [a figure of ] 
the god-of-the-lifted-hand which shall have plumes upon its 


544 THE AMULET OF THE PILLOW Chap. clxv. 12 


head; the legs thereof shall be wide apart, and the middle 
portion of it shall be in the form of (12) a beetle, and it shall 
be painted blue with lapis-lazuli mixed with qgamai water. 
And [it shall be recited over] a figure with a head like unto 
that of a man, and the hands and arms thereof shall be 
stretched (13) away [from its body]; above its right shoulder 
shall there be the head of a ram, and above its left shoulder 
shall there be the head of aram. And thou shalt paint upon 
a piece of linen a figure of the god-of-the-lifted-hand (14) 
immediately over his heart, and thou shalt paint the [other] 
figure over the breasts. Let not the god Sukati (15) who is in 
the underworld know it. Then shall the deceased drink water 
from the source of the stream, and he shall shine like the stars 
in the heavens above. 


CHAPTER CLXVI. 


[From the Papyrus of Nebseni (Brit. Mus. No. 9900, sheet 21).] 


Vignette : A head-rest,. 


Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF THE PILLOW. 


“Thou art lifted up, O sick one that liest prostrate, 
(2) O scribe Nebseni. (3) They lift up thy head to 


Chap. clxvi.5.] THE AMULET OF THE PILLOW 545 


“the horizon, thou art raised up, and dost triumph by 
“reason of what hath been done for thee. Ptah hath 
“overthrown (4) thine enemies [according to what] was 
“ordered to be done for thee. Thou art Horus, the 
“son of Hathor, Nesert, Nesertet, who giveth [back] 
“the head (5) after the slaughter. Thy head shall not 
“be carried away from thee after [the slaughter], thy 
“head shall never, never be carried away from thee.” 


VOL, III, 6) 


546 OF BRINGING THE UTCHAT [Chap. clxvii. 


CHAPTER CLXVII. 


[From the Papyrus of Nebseni (Brit. Mus. No. 9900, sheet 22). ] 


Vignette: An Utchat resting upon the emblem of gold (°). 


Text: (1) THE CHAPTER OF BRINGING THE UTCHAT. 
(2) Nebseni, the scribe, saith :—(3) 

“The god Thoth hath brought the Utchat, (4) and 
‘he hath made it to rest (or to be at peace) after it 
‘departed, [O] (5) Ra. It was grievously afflicted by 
“storm, but Thoth (6) made it to be at rest after it 
“had departed from the storm. I am sound, (7) and it 
“is sound; I am sound, and it is sound; and Nebseni, 
“the lord of piety, is sound.” 


Chap. clxviii.] 


CHAPTER 
CLXVIII. 


[From the Papyrus 

of Mut-hetep (Brit. 

Mus. No. 10,010, 
sheet 2). ] 


Vignette: (a) A 
stream upon which 
sail three boats. 
The first contains 
Khnemu,the second 
Khepera, and the 
third Ra; each god 
is seated in a shrine. 
Harpocrates occu- 
pies the place of 
look-out in the 
boats of Khnemu 
and Ra. Behind 
the boats Ra is 
seated on a throne 
which rests on the 
water; two hands 
and arms stretch 
down from heaven 
and enshrine him. 
(6) A man-headed 
sphinx on a bier. 
A god with a ser- 
pent on his head. 
Two gods lying 
on biers with a 
serpent between. 
Anubis. A goddess 


VIGNETTE 


Tar 


yw 
AAA 
LAAA 
AAG 
WAG 
BH 
Cw 
AF 
ADA 
AA 
way 
MAA 
LAA 
KAA 
LAZA 
Gre 
uw 
A 
Cas 
AAA 
WNAA 
Aww 
CA 
AAA 
Cn 
Aa 
AAA 
RAZ 
Vw 
Ay 
AAA 
WAH 
AGS 
AAA 
AAA 
Aw 
AY 
Ao 
NAA 
Care 
AA 
SF 
MA 
wee 
nA 
AAA 
aoe 
LAA 
AAA 


RE RURRES 


SSSR ego 


BSS 


Bees 


548 PRAYERS AND SUPPLICATION [Chap. clxviii. §x 


seated, A bull on a pedestal. A man-headed lion. Two gods 

and two goddesses. A bowed human figure and a mummy. 

A man holding a disk. A disk shedding light. Two women 

lying face downwards. Two male figures, each carrying a 
human being on his head. 


Text: The twenty-seven short lines of text which 
accompany this Vignette consist of extracts from a 
version of the Chapter which is given in full imme- 
diately following, and to this the reader is referred. 


CHAPTER CLXVIII. 
[From the Papyrus, Brit. Mus. No. 10,478, sheets 2—7. ] 
Section I. 


1. Text : (1) ‘‘ May they who carry the burden above 
“them to heaven in front of the boat of 
“Ra grant that Osiris. ..1 may see Ra 
“when he shineth.” 

Vignette: A god carrying a child upon 
his shoulders, and the number four, Illl. 

Text: (2) “And there shall be made 
“unto them an offering of a libation of 
“one vase upon earth by Osiris . . . the lord of offer- 
“inos in Amentet, in the Bight of Sekhet-hetep.” 


1 Spaces intended for the name of the deceased are painted in 
yellow but left blank throughout the papyrus; from the fact that 
the name ‘ Mut’ frequently occurs immediately following a space, 
it would seem that the deceased was an official of this goddess. 


Chap clxviii.§r] PRAYERS AND SUPPLICATIONS 549 


2. Text: (1) “May they who carry the burden 
“above them to heaven in front of the 
“boat of Ra grant that Osiris... . 
““may see Ra when he shineth.” 


Vignette: A god carrying a child upon 
his shoulders, and Illl. 


Text: (2) “And there shall be made 
“unto them an offering of a libation of 


“one vase upon earth by Osiris . . . the follower of 
“the great god, the lord of the beautiful Amentet.” 


3. Text: (1) “May they who smite Ra grant that 
‘“‘cakes shall come unto Osiris 
“. . , , as to the followers of Ra 
‘‘Twhen] he setteth.” 


Vignette : A woman lying face Co 
S— 


| 


downwards, and lll. 

Text: (2) “And there shall 
“be made unto them an offering 
‘of a libation of one vase upon earth by Osiris . . 
“‘when Horus, the lord of Tehent, cometh.” 


4. Text: (1) “ May they who possess offerings grant 
“that Osiris... . shall exist, 
“even as do those who are in 
“the underworld.” 


Vignette : A woman lying face 
downwards, and lll. 


Text: (2) “And there shall be 
“made unto them an offering of a 


550 PRAYERS AND SUPPLICATIONS [Chap. clxviii. §1 


“libation of one vase upon earth by Osiris . . . . who 
“shall come forth and go in along with Ra for ever.” 


5. Text: (1) “May those who build up grant that 
“Osiris... . shall arrive hap- 
“pily in the Hall of Double 
ce Drains 


Vignette : A woman lying face 
downwards, and Illl. 


Text: (2) “And there shall 
“be made unto them an offering 
‘of a libation of one vase upon earth by Osiris . . . as 
“lord of offerings in the beautiful Amentet.” 


6. Text: (1) “May those who make adorations grant 
“that Osiris... . shall follow after 
“ Ra in his boat.” 

Vignette: A god bowing to the 


ground, and lll. 
wi Text: (2) “And there shall be 


“made unto them an offering of a 


“Jibation of one vase upon earth by 
“Osiris . . . . who shall walk with long strides with 
“the gods of the underworld.” 


7. Text: (1) “May those who have offerings, and 


Chap. clxvili.§ 2] PRAYERS AND SUPPLICATIONS nays 


“who make sacrificial meals for the gods, grant obla- 
“tions of tchefaw food to Osiris... . 
“in the underworld. 

Vignette : A god holding upright a 
conical object \. 

Text: (2) “And there shall be made 
“unto them an offering of a libation of 


“one vase upon earth by Osiris.... 
“along with them, whose souls shall stand up at the 
“pylon.” 


Section Il. THE Gops OF THE EIGHTH QERERT 
IN THE UNDERWORLD, WHOSE ATTRIBUTES ARE HIDDEN, 
AND WHO.... WINDS. 


1. Text: (1) “May the gods who dwell in their 
“shrines, the princes of Nu, grant that 
“Osiris .... shall drink water.” 

Vignette: A god in a shrine, with 
three serpents in front of him and three 


behind him; at the entrance to the shrine 
is the number fourteen MIlll. 


Text: (2) “And there shall be 
“made unto them an offering of a 
“libation of one vase upon earth by Osiris... .; may 
“his soul live and his body be preserved in the under- 
“ world.” ) 


552 PRAYERS AND SUPPLICATIONS [Chap. clxviii. § 2 


2. Text: (1) “May the gods who are in the follow- 
“ing of Osiris grant that the body 
oe “of Osiris .... shall rest along 
‘with his sah.” 


Vignette: A woman, and a god, and 
the number fourteen NIIll. 


Text: (2) “And there shall be 
“made unto them an offering of a 


‘‘libation of one vase upon earth by Osiris... . by the 
“side of the great god within his boat.” 


8. Text: (1) “May Aha (i.e, He who standeth) 


‘‘make Osiris... . to praise Ra when he 
“riseth.” 

Vignette: A god, standing, holding a~ 
sceptre. 


Text: (2) “And there shall be made 
“unto them an offering of a libation of 
“one vase upon earth by Osiris . 3 
“triumphant, who shall be with those who are over 
“{their| altars.” 


4. Text: (1) “May Amen (ie.; the Hidden one) 
“give power unto Osiris... . in 
“the Hall of Seb.” 
Vignette: A cow on a standard. 
Text: (2) “And there shall be 


“made unto them an offering of a 


“libation of one vase upon earth by 


Chap. clxvili. §2] PRAYERS AND SUPPLICATIONS 553 


“Osiris .... triumphant, who knoweth all the mysteries 
“of the Tuat.” 


5. Text: (1) “May Sheta (7.e., the Secret one), 
“make the body of Osiris . ... to grow 
“and to be sound upon earth and in the 
“underworld.” 

Vignette: A god standing upright. 

Text: (2) “And there shall be made unto 
“them an offering of a libation of one vase 
“by Osiris . . . . as the lord of strides in 
“the underworld and in Re-stau.” 


tps 


6. Text: (1) “May Setek give cakes and ale to 
“Osiris .... along with you in the 
“ House of Osiris.” 


Vignette: A star and a god, standing, 
with a platform upon his head, whereon are 
a cow and an uraeus. 


Text: (2) “And there shall be 
“made unto them an offering of a 


—_—_- 


“libation of one vase upon earth by Osiris . . . . who 
‘hath entered into all the secret places of the Tuat.” 


7. Text: (1) “May Sesheta Ausar (¢.c., he who 
“maketh Osiris to be secret) grant that Osixisean 


554 PRAYERS AND SUPPLICATIONS [Chap. clxviii. § 2 


“may be a lord of stride{s] in the habitation of 
“'Tchesert.” 


Vignette: A cow standing on a plat- 
form, and uraeus. 


Text: (2) “ And there shall be made 
“unto them an offering of a Jibation 
“of one vase upon earth when he 


“becometh the lord of an abode in 
“the underworld.” 


8. Text: (1) “May Sherem not allow any evil 
“thing to come to Osiris... . in the 
“underworld.” 

Vignette: A god standing upright. 

I Text: (2) “And there shall be made 
“unto them an offering of a libation of one 
‘vase upon earth by Osiris .. . . the soul 

“that hearkeneth unto the words of the gods.” 


9, Text: (1) “ May Sta (¢.e., the leader) grant that 
“Osiris .... may see Ra when he 
“yiseth and when he setteth.” 


Vignette: A cow and uraeus upon a 
standard. 


Text: (2) “And there shall be made 
“unto them an offering of a libation of 
“one vase upon earth by Osiris .. . 


oe) 
“may his limbs live and may his limbs be sound for 
* ever,” 


Wy 


Chap. clxviii.§ 2] PRAYERS AND SUPPLICATIONS SS 


10. Text: (1) “May Senk (.e., splendour), give 
“glory to Osiris... . upon earth, and 


“make him strong in Amentet.” 

Vignette : A god standing upright. 

Text: (2) “And there shall be made 
“unto them an offering of a libation of one i 
“vase upon earth by Osiris... .; may 


“his legs have power as the lord of an 
“abode in Amentet.” 


ll. Text: (1) “May He-who-liveth-in-darkness 
““(i.e., Horus) grant that Osiris... . 
“shall be among those who are over 
“their altars.” 


Vignette: A crocodile-headed god 
standing upright. 


Text: (2) “ And there shall be made 
“unto them an offering of a libation of 


“one vase upon earth by Osiris . . . . who is in the 
“ everlasting Tuat.” 


iomeTextce (i) May the. .. - of Osiris . 
“orant that he shall be near the great 


“sod, the lord of Amentet.” Dy 
Vignette: A god standing upright, and [j= 
the number four, Illl. 
Text: (2) “And there shall-be made 
“unto them an offering of a libation of 
“one vase upon earth by Osiris... .; 


556 PRAYERS AND SUPPLICATIONS [Chap. clxviii. §2 


“may he become the lord of [his] hands and have power 
“over [his] heart. in the underworld.” 


13. Text: (1) “ May those whose hands hide grant 
“that Osiris .... shall be along with 
( “them in the underworld.” 


Vignette: A goddess standing upright, and 
hiding something with her hands. 


Text: (2) “And there shall be made 
“unto them an offering of a libation of 
“one vase upon earth by Osiris ..... ; 
“may they bring me to the throne of Osiris.” 


14. Text: (1) “ May those whose hands ‘hide grant 
“that Osiris .. . shall be sound, and that 
‘offerings shall be before him continually.” 

Vignette : [As in No. 13, but with Illl.] 

Text: (2) “And there shall be made 
“unto them an offering of a libation of 
“one vase upon earth by Osiris . . . who 
“shall be [a lord of] horns and shall listen 
“unto the words of the gods.” 


15. Text: (1) ““May He whose limbs are hidden 
“give right and truth to Osiris before 
“ha, and in the company of his gods.” 
Vignette: A god standing upright. 
Text: (2) “And there shall be made 
“unto them an offering of a libation of 


“one vase upon earth by Osiris... . 


Chap. clxviii. §2] PRAYERS AND SUPPLICATIONS 557 


“as lord of the phallus and ravisher of women for 
“ever.” 


16. Text: (1) “May the souls who come forth open 
“the mouth of Osiris . . . . among 
“the gods who are along with them.” 


Vignette: A bird on a tree, and the 
number four, Illl. 


Text: (2) “And there shall be 
“made unto them an offering of a 


“libation of one vase upon earth by 
“QOsiris .... among the living ones, the lords of 
“eternity.” 


17. Text: (1) “May those who belong to their 
poo orant: that Osiris . .-.,. may 
“have power over his offerings upon 
“earth, even as have the gods, the lords 
“of [offerings |.” 

Vignette: A god standing upright, and 
the number four, Illl. 

Text: (2) “And there shall be made 
“unto them an offering of a libation of one vase upon 
“earth by Osiris . . . . who shall be endowed abun. 
“dantly with tchefaw food in the underworld.” 


Tometext: (1) “ May those who receive grant that 


558 


CHU Visite aia 


PRAYERS AND SUPPLICATIONS [Chap. clxviii. §2 


. shall enter in over all the secret 


“places of the Tuat.” 


Vignette: A god bowing to the ground, 
and a star. 


Text: (2) ‘And there shall be made 
“unto them an offering of a libation of 
“one vase upon earth by Osiris .. . 
“who shall have power over offerings 


“upon earth, and be the lord of altars.” 


19. Text: (1) “May the Anenit (i.e., Widows (?)) 


“orant that Osiris .. . shall be with 
“the great god as possessor of a 
“phallus before .. .” 


Vignette : A woman kneeling on a 
couch. 


Text: (2) “And there shall be 
“made unto them an offering of a 


“libation of one vase upon earth by Osiris . . . who 


“shall be ordered to dwell in the secret place in the 


“ darkness.” 


20. Text: (1) “May Osiris-Anubis grant that 


“Osiris . . . may be a possessor of a 
“seat in Ta-tchesertet.” 


Vignette: Anubis holding a hawk- 
headed sceptre in each hand. 


Text: (2) “And there shall be made 
“unto them an offering of a libation 
“of one vase upon earth by Osiris 


Chap. clxviii. §3] PRAYERS AND SUPPLICATIONS 559 


ce 


.... Who shall go in and pass through the pylon of 
Osiris.” 


Section ITT. 


THE GODS OF THE [TENTH] QERERT IN THE TUAT 
WHO ARE TO BE PRAISED AND WHOSE MYSTERIES ARE 
HOLY. 


1. Text: (1) ‘‘ May those who are denizens of light 
“orant that Osiris ... shall shine in 
“‘the darkness.” 

Vignette: A god standing upright, and 
the number eight, ie 

Text: (2) “And there shall be made 
“unto them an offering of a libation of 


“one vase upon earth by Osiris . . . who 
“‘praiseth the great god in his abode day by day.” 


2. Text: (1) “May the Smiters grant that Osiris 


“|, . may be among those who sing 


“ praises.” 


Vignette : A goddess standing upright Wl 
holding in her upraised hand a hatchet 
dripping with blood, and the number eight, Vuil 


tl 
It 


Text: (2) “And there shall be 
‘¢ made unto them an offering of a libation of one vase 


“upon earth by Osiris... . on the day when he 


560 PRAYERS AND SUPPLICATIONS [Chap. clxviii. § 3 


“repulseth the serpent fiend Bi, the mighty one of 
“iniquity.” 


3. Text: (1) “May the company of the gods who 
‘“ouard those who are in [the 
“Tuat],.... give the breaths 
“of life to Osiris upon earth and 
“in the underworld.” 

Vignette: A god lying on a bier, 


and the number nine, ibe 


Text: (2) “And there shall 
“be made unto them an offering of a libation of one 
‘vase upon earth by Osiris . . . ., who shooteth forth 
[his] hand, and repulseth him that cometh.” 


4. Text: (1) “May the company of the gods of the 
“hidden hand give glory unto Osiris 
oe . as unto the perfect Khus.” 


Ul {il Vignette: A god standing upright, and 
the number nine, re 
1] Text: (2) “And there shall be made 


“unto them an offering of a libation 

“of one vase upon earth by Osisis .. . ., 
“who shall be sound upon earth and in the under- 
“world.” 


5. Text: (1) “May the Hidden goddess grant that 


Chap. clxviii. § 3] PRAYERS AND SUPPLICATIONS 561 


“the soul of Osiris ... may grow, and that his 
“body may be preserved even as are 
“those of the gods who dwell in the ee ginelta 


<Tuat,” ea 
Vignette: A woman standing before 
an Utchat. 


Text: (2) “And there shall be A 
“made unto them an offering of a 
“libation of one vase upon earth by Osiris . . ., whose 
“soul shall rest upon whatever seat he pleaseth. 


6. Text: (1) “May the souls of the gods who have 
“come into being in the members nae 
“of Osiris... grant that he 
“shall have peace.” 


Vignette : A woman lying upon 
her back, and the number twenty-one, 
Nin. 

Text: (2) “And there shall be 


“made unto them an offering of a libation of one vase 


“upon earth by Osiris . . ., who shall receive his place 
“in the land of the underworld.” 


7. Text: (1) “May those who praise Ra not turn 
“Osiris ... back at the pylons of the 
eyTuat,» 

Vignette: A god standing upright, and the 
number four, Illl. 


Text: (2) “And there shall be made unto 
“them an offering of a libation of one vase 
“pon earth by Osiris . . ., who shall come 

VOL. III. D 


562 PRAYERS AND SUPPLICATIONS  [Chap. clxviii. § 3 


“forth by day and shall refresh himself in the place of 
“coolness.” 


8. Text: (1) “May the beings of warlike face grant 
“coolness unto Osiris . . . in the place of 
“ flame.” 


Vignette : A woman standing upright, and 
the number four, IIll. 


Text: (2) “And there shall be made 
‘unto them an offering of a libation of one 
“vase upon earth by Osiris . . ., who shall 
‘sit in the shrine with the great god.” 


Section IV. 


THE GODS OF THE ELEVENTH QERERET [OF THE 
G00 | eee eee tee 


1. Text: (1) “May the goddess Amemet grant that 
“Osiris . . . shall be strong before 
“the great god in the Tuat.” 

Vignette : A woman in a shrine. 

Text: (2) “And there shall be 
“made unto them an offering of a 
‘libation of one vase upon earth by 
“Qsiris . . ., who shall become like 
“the god Khepera in Amentet.” 


2. Text: (1) “ May the Soul of Ament grant sepul- 


Chap, clxviii.§ 4] PRAYERS AND SUPPLICATIONS 563 


“chral meals unto Osiris . . . upon earth and in the 
“underworld. 

Vignette: A god standing upright. 

Text: (2) “And there shall be made 
“unto them an offering of a libation of 
“one vase upon earth by Osiris . . ., the 
“Jord of the abode of peace in the moun- 
“tain of the underworld.” 


3. Text: (1) “May the Soul of the 
“Qsiris . ... to triumph over his ene- 
“mies in heaven and upon earth.” 


Vignette: A god standing upright, with 
drooping hands, and the number four, Illl. 


Text: (2) “And there shall be made 
“unto them an offering of a libation of 


“one vase upon earth by Osiris... ., 
“whose body shall be concealed from any that would 
“look upon him.” 


4, Text: (1) “ May those who sing praises grant that 
“QOgirig . . . Shall be like the divine 
‘mariners who are in heaven.” 


Vignette : A god standing upright with 
his hands raised, and the number Illl, 


Text; (2) “And there shall be 
“made unto them an offering of a 
“libation of one vase upon earth by 


564 PRAYERS AND SUPPLICATIONS (Chap. clxviii. § 4 


“Osiris ... when he entereth through the hidden 
“pylons.” 


5. Text: (1) “May the company of the gods who 
“rule over Ament grant that Osiris 
«, .. shall go in* through the 
“secret door of the House of 
“Osiris.” 

Vignette: A god lying upon a bier, 
and the number nine, ae 

Text: (2) “And there shall be 
‘made unto them an offering of a libation of one vase 
“upon earth by Osiris . . ., who shall walk with long 
“strides among the lords of the Tuat.” 


6. Text: (1) “May the company of the gods who 
“are in the following of Osiris 
“orant that Osiris... shall 
“have power over his enemies.” 
Vignette: A god lying upon, or 
by the side of, a serpent on a bier. 
Text: (2) “And there shall be 
“made unto them an offering of 


‘a libation of one vase upon earth by Osiris . . . when 
“he becometh a perfect soul day by day (?).” 


7. Text: (1) “ May Ageh grant that Osiris shall be 


Chap. clxviii. § 4] PRAYERS AND SUPPLICATIONS 565 


“with Ra, and that he shall walk over heaven for 
“ever.” 


Vignette: A god standing upright and 
holding a sceptre. 


Text: (2) “And there shall be made 
“unto them an offering of a libation of 
“one vase upon earth by Osiris . . . when 
“he is in the following of him that 
“ dwelleth in the city of embalmment (7.c., Anubis), the 
“Jord of 'T'a-tchesert.”’ 


8.. Text: (1) “ May those who... . Osiris grant 
“that the soul of Osiris... . may live, and 
“that it may never die a second time.” 


Vignette: A god standing upright, and the 
number four, Illl. 


Text: (2) “And there shall be made 
“unto them an offering of a libation of one 


“vase upon earth by Osiris . . ., for whom 
“Jamentation shall be decreed as for his god.” 


9. Text: (1) “May the Nine Watchers grant that 
“Osiris . . . may wake up and that 
“he may never be destroyed.” 

Vignette: Anubis on a standard, 
and the number nine, rs 

Text: (2) “And there shall be 
‘‘made unto them an offering of a 
“libation of one vase upon earth by Osiris . . ., trium- 
‘‘phant before Osiris; the lord of the land of the Lake.” 


5606 PRAYERS AND SUPPLICATIONS [Chap. clxviii. § 4 


10. Text: (1) “May the Nine Mourners cause 
“mourning to be made for Osiris 


. as was made for Osiris.” 


Vignette: A woman lying on 
the ground face downwards. 


Text : (2) “And there shall be 
‘made unto them an offering of a 


‘libation of one vase upon earth 
‘by Osiris . . . when his soul cometh forth with the 
CO GRO 


11. Text: (1) “May he that invoketh Ra invoke 
: “Qsiris . . . before Ra and before the 
“company of his gods.” 

Vignette: A god crying out to some one. 

Text: (2) “And there shall be made 
“unto them an offering of a libation of 
“one vase upon earth by Osiris... 
“when his soul goeth into the hidden 
“place and cometh forth from earth.” 


12. Text: (1) “May Agen drive away every evil 
“thing from Osiris . . . for ever.” 


Vignette : A god standing upright with hands 
hanging down. 


Text: (2) “And there shall be made 
“unto them an offering of a libation of one 
“vase upon earth by Osiris . . . when he 
“cometh in peace and hath triumphed.” 


Chap. clxviii. §4] PRAYERS AND SUPPLICATIONS 567 


13. Text: (1) “May those who dwell with Tesert 
“erant that Osiris .... may go in 


“and come out with long strides like 
“the lords of the Tuat.” 


Vignette: A woman-headed serpent 
on a pylon. 


Text: (2) “And there shall be 
“made unto them an offering of a 
“Jibation of one vase upon earth by Osiris . . 


who 
“shall go in and come forth through the door of the 


we) 


Paat.- 


14. Text: (1) “May the goddess Tesert grant that 
“Osiris ... may have power over the 
“water.” 


Vignette : A god standing upright, and the 
number four, Illl. Tl 


Text: (2) “And there shall be made 
“unto them an offering of a libation of one 
‘vase upon earth by Osiris... . when he 
“shall walk up the Great Staircase.” 


ae 


15. Text: (1) “May Mehenit grant that Osiris .. . 
“may be a distinguished being in the 
“Tuat for ever.” 

Vignette: A serpent on a pylon. 

Text: (2) “And there shall be made 
“unto them an offering of a libation of 
“one vase upon earth by Osiris . . 
“ag a perfect soul in his shrine.” 


568 PRAYERS AND SUPPLICATIONS (Chap. clxviii. § 4 


16. Text: (1) “May those who dwell with Mehenit 
‘“orant that Osiris... may walk with 
‘Jong strides in the holy place.” 


Vignette: A woman standing upright, and 
the number four, Illl. 


1 Text: (2) “And there shall be made unto 
“them an offering of a libation of one vase 
“upon earth by Osiris .... when he is 
“ with the followers of Horus.” 


17. Text: (1) “May the company of the gods who 
“hide Osiris grant that Osiris... 
“shall sit upon the throne which he 
“loveth.” 

Vignette: A seated god, and the 
number nine, ie 

Text: (2) “And there shall be made 
“unto them an offering of a libation 


“of one vase upon earth by Osiris . . ., who shall be 
‘among the lords of Maat.” 


18. Text: (1) “May he that destroyeth the face 
‘“‘open the face of Osiris . . . and let him see 
“the Khu.” 

Vignette : A god standing upright. 

Text: (2) “And there shall be made unto 
“them an offering of a libation of one vase 
“upon earth by Osiris . . ., who shall be in 
“the following of the goddess Mehi of 
“ Amentet.” 


Chap. clxviii.§5] PRAYERS AND SUPPLICATIONS 569 


Section V. 


THE GODS OF THE TWELFTH QERERET IN THE 
DUAT ors 


1. Text: (1) “May Maat grant that Osiris. . . 
“be a lord of the Lake of Maati.” 


Vignette: A god standing upright and 
holding a sceptre. 


Text: (2) “And there shall be made 
“unto them an offering of a libation of 
“one vase upon earth by Osiris . . . asa 
“lord of offerings in Sekhet-Aaru.” 


2. “Text: (1) “May the gods who dwell in the land 
“of the Tuat grant justice unto Osiris... 
“in the Hall of Double Truth.” 


Vignette: A god standing upright and 
holding a sceptre. 


Text: (2) “And there shall be made 
‘unto them an offering of a libation of 
“one vase upon earth by Osiris . 


“who shall plough in Sekhet-Hetep.” 


eof 


3. Text : (1) ‘‘ May the gods who dwell with Mehen 
“orant that Osiris . . . shall be 
“in whatsoever place his ha 
“ wisheth to be.” 


Vignette: A god within the folds 
of a serpent. 


Text: (2) “And there shall 
“be made unto them an offering 


570 PRAYERS AND SUPPLICATIONS [Chap. clxviii. § 5 


“of a libation of one vase upon earth by Osiris. . ., 
“who shall come into being at the words of the 
“lord of Amentet.” 


: (1) “ May the gods who possess land grant 
“a lake unto Osiris . . . in Sekhet- 
“Aanru.”’ 

Vignette: A god standing upright, and the 
number four, IlI'. 


Text: (2) “And there shall be made 
“unto them an offering of a libation of 


‘one vase upon earth by Osiris . . ., who 
“shall sit upon whatsoever place he would there.” 


5. Text: (1) “May Her-ta(?) grant an estate unto 
“Osiris . . . in Sekhet-Hetep.” 

Vignette : A snake-headed god. 

Text: (2) “And there shall be made 
“unto them an offering of a libation of 
“one vase upon earth by Osiris. . ., 
“who shall be protected by amulets (?) 
“like the lords of the ‘Tuat.” 


6. Text: (1) “May the gods who dwell in the land 


Chap. clxviii. §5] PRAYERS AND SUPPLICATIONS By 


“grant offerings, and tchefaw food, and joints of meat 
“to Osiris . . . in the underworld.” 


Vignette: A god standing upright with 
arms hanging down, and the number four, Iill. 


Text: (2) “And there shall be made 
“unto them an offering of a libation of ail 
“one vase upon earth by Osiris . . . when 
“Ra sitteth in Manu.” 


7. Text: (1) “May the Chiefs of the secret things 
“who dwell in the land place their wall 
“behind Osiris... even as they do for [a 
“the Still-Heart.” 

Vignette: A ram-headed sceptre. 

Text: (2) “And there shall be made unto 
“them an offering of a libation of one vase 
“upon earth by Osiris . . . when he cometh 
“forth and goeth into the underworld.” 


8. Text: (1) “May the gods who dwell in the folds 
“of the serpent goddess Mehen 
“orant a sight of the Disk to 
Osiris. oo 


Vignette : A god within the folds 
of a serpent. 


Text : (2) “And there shall be 
“made unto them an offering of 
“a libation of one vase upon earth by Osiris... 


572 OF STABLISHING THE HENKIT (Chap. clxix. 


“as a khw who hath gained power over fresh 
“water.” 


9. Text: (1) “May Auu-ba(?) grant peace unto 
“Osiris . . . in Amentet.” 

Vignette: A god bowing. 

Text: (2) “And there shall be made 
‘unto them an offering of a libation of one 
“vase upon earth by Osiris . . . in coming 


“out and going into Ament, along with 
‘other folk [therein ].” 


CHAPTER CLXIX. 


[From the Papyrus of Nefer-uben-f (see Naville, op. cit., Bd. I. 
Bl. 190).] 


Vignette : This Chapter is without vignette. 
Text: THE CHAPTER OF MAKING TO STAND UP THE 


Henxit.! (1) The Am-khent, Osiris Nefer-uben-f, 
triumphant, saith :— 


“Thou art the Lion god. Thou art the double Lion- 
“god. Thou art Horus, the avenger of his father 
“[Osiris]. Thou art Four, the four glorious gods. 


1 T.e., the funeral bed. 


Chap. clxix.7] OF STABLISHING THE HENKIT 573 


“Acclamation is made [unto thee], along with cries 
“of delight (2) and sounds of joy, and the water from 
“their haunches and from their thighs I bring [unto 
“thee]. Thou art lifted up on thy right side, and thou 
“art lifted up on thy left side. The god Seb hath 
“opened for thee (3) thy two eyes which were blind, and 
“he hath given [thee] the power to stretch out thy legs 
“lin walking]. Hath been bound unto thee thy heart 
‘“(ab), [thy] mother, and thy heart (Adt) is in thy body. 
“Thy soul is in heaven, and thy body is under the 
“round. There are cakes for thy body, and water for 
“thy throat, and sweet (4) breezes for thy nostrils, 
“and thou art satisfied with offerings. Those who 
“dwell in their shrines open their abodes (?) unto 
“thee, thou hast thy provisions (7), and thou journeyest 
“along. Thou art stablished upon that which ema- 
“nateth from thy existence, and thou comest forth 
“from heaven. The cord hath been coiled up for thee 
“<(5) by the side of Ra, and thou snarest fish with the 
‘net in the stream from which thou drinkest vessels of 
“water. Thou performest a journey on thy legs, and 
“in going forward thou dost not stumble (?); thou 
‘“comest forth (6) from over the earth, thou dost not 
“make thy appearance from below the walls [thereof]. 
“Thy walls are not thrown down, and what there is of 
“thine within hath been made for thee by the god of 
“thy city. Thou art pure, thou art pure. Thy fore 
‘parts are washed by libations, and thy hinder parts 
“are cleansed (7) with resin and natron, and made cool 


574 OF STABLISHING THE HENKIT  [Chap. clxix. 8 


“with incense. Thou art made clean with the milk of 
“the Hap cow, and with the ale of the goddess Tenemit, 
‘Cand with natron. All the evil which clung to thee 
(8) hath been done away with, and Tefnet, the 
“daughter of Ra, hath made offerings on thy behalf 
“even as she did for her father Ra; and the funeral 
“valley which was the burial-place of her father Osiris 
‘hath been set in order for thee. I make to eat of the 
“sweet things (9) which he giveth there the Osiris 
“Nefer-uben-f, triumphant, that is to say, the celestial 
“cakes which are before Ra, and the grain (?), and 
“drink, and the four terrestrial cakes which are before 
“the god Seb, and the grain [brought by] the citizens. 
“ (10) I have brought unto thee Sekhet-hetep and the 
“ oifts thereof are before thee. Thou comest forth as 
“Ra, thou hast gotten power as Ra, and thou hast 
‘“‘ootten power over thy legs; and thou, O Osiris 
“‘Nefer-uben-f, hast gotten power over thy legs at 
“every (11) season and at every hour. Thou hast 
“not been condemned in the judgment, thou hast not 
“been put under restraint, a guard hath not been set 
“over thee, thou hast not been imprisoned, and thou 
“hast not been given over to the chamber of the Fiends 
(12) therein. The sand is gathered together before 
“thy face and guarded are the offerings which are for 
“thee; thy face is not suffered to be turned back, and 
“thou art guarded and dost not come forth. Thou 
“hast received thy tunic, and thy sandals, and thy 
“stick, (18) and thy garment, and thy weapons for 


Chap. clxix.19] OF STABLISHING THE HENKIT 575 


“fighting of all kinds wherewith thou shalt cut off 
“heads; thou shalt turn back the necks of thy foes 
“whom thou shalt take captive, and thou shalt keep 
“away from thee death so that it shall not come nigh 
“unto thee. And the (14) Great God hath said con- 
“cerning thee: ‘Bring him [hither] on the day when 
“events take place.’ The Hawk rejoiceth in thee, and 
“the Smen goose cackleth at thee. Ra openeth for 
“thee the doors of heaven, and Seb unbolteth for thee 
“the earth. (15) Thy khu is mighty, and it is perfect 
“knowing thy name; thy soul maketh a way through 
“ Ament, and thy perfect soul, O Nefer-uben-f, trium- 
“»phant, hath the power of speech. Thy form is within 
“Ra, (16) and it resteth within the divine sovereign 
“chiefs of him who uniteth the two paths; mankind 
“keepeth guard over it, and the double Lion-god guideth 
“it, to the place where thou, O Osiris Nefer-uben-f, 
“triumphant, makest thy ka to rest. And behold, the 
“two lands and mankind work (17) the snare for thee. 
“Thou livest, thy soul is strong, thy body is enduring 
“and great, thou hast sight of the fire, thou dost snuff 
“the breeze, thy face doth penetrate into the house of 
“ darkness, (18) thou abidest at the Gap, thou dost not 
“see the whirlwind and the storm, thou followest in 
“the train of the prince of the two lands, and thou 
“refreshest thyself on the branch of merit tree on both 
“sides of the god Ur-hekau. The goddess Seshetet 
“sitteth (19) before thee, the god Sa protecteth thy 
‘members, the steer and his cow give thee milk from 


576 OF STABLISHING THE HENKIT [Chap. clxix. 20 


‘‘the breast [in] the following of Sekhat-Heru. Thou 
“washest thyself at the mouth of the stream of Kher- 
‘aha, (20) thou art in favour with the princes of the 
“cities of Pe and Tep, the god Thoth and thyself see 
“each other, and Ra in heaven holdeth converse with 
‘“‘thee, thou comest forth from and thou enterest into 
“the anit chamber, and thou holdest converse with the 
“two divine combatants (i.e., Horus and Set). (21) 
“Thy ka is with thee to make thee to rejoice, thy heart 
“is with thee to [give thee] thy transformations, happy 
‘“. . . keep watch over thee, the company of the gods 
“make thy heart glad, thou comest forth to four cakes 
“in the city of Sekhem, and four in (22) the city of 
“ Aqennu, thou comest forth to four in the city of 
“Annu, upon the altar of the lady of the two lands. 
“The stars keep watch over thee by night, the lords 
“of Annu have a favour unto thee, the god Hu is in 
“thy mouth, thy feet are not (23) turned back, and thy 
‘members have life. Thou graspest the sma in Abtu, 
“the sacrificial cakes of the divine chiefs and the liba- 
“tions of the celestial beings are brought forward to 
“thee, with the offerings in the festival (24) which are 
‘due to Osiris on the morning of the Uak festival for 
‘hidden things (?). Thou art ornamented with objects 
“of gold, and thine apparel is interwoven (?) with 
“byssus. Hapi (i.e., the Nile) thrusteth himself upon 
“thy body (25), thou hast power over the tablet (?) 
“which is inscribed with [lists of] offerings, and thou 
“drinkest water on both sides of the Lake of Testes (?). 


Chap. clxx.2] OF ARRANGING THE FUNERAL BED 577 


“The gods who are there have a favour unto thee, 
“and thou comest forth from heaven along with the 
“gods (26) who make to advance the madt of Ra, and 
“thou art led into the presence of the company of the 
“gods; and there is done for thee even as it is done 
“for one of them. Thou art the Khart bird of the 
“geese, and Ptah of the Southern (27) Wall maketh 
“an offering unto Nefer-uben-f, triumphant.” 


CHAPTER CLXX. 


{From the Papyrus of Nefer-uben-f (see Naville, op. cit., Bd. I. 
Bl. 191).] 


Vignette : This Chapter is without vignette. 


Text: THE CHAPTER OF ARRANGING THE HENKIT.! 
(1) The Osiris Nefer-uben-f saith :— 

“Thy flesh have I given unto thee. Thy bones have 
“T fastened together for thee. Thy members have I 
“‘eollected for thee. The earth submitteth itself unto 
“thee. Thy limbs are guarded. Thou art the (2) 
“mighty one within the egg. Thou art set in order. 
“Thou seest the gods(?). Thou settest out on thy 
“way, and thy hand [reacheth] unto the horizon, 


I Len the funeral bed. 
VOL. III. E 


578 OF ARRANGING THE FUNERAL BED [Chap. clxx. 


“and unto the holy place where thou wouldst be. 
“There is acclamation made unto thee, and there are 
‘“(3) shouts of joy raised to thee at thine appearances 
“at the altar. Horus maketh thee to stand up at his 
“‘risings, even as he did him who is in the chamber of 
“holiness. Hail, Osiris Nefer-uben-f, triumphant, the 
“ goddess Ua (?) hath given thee birth, (4) and Anpu 
“(Anubis), who dwelleth upon his hill, hath set thee 
“in order, and he hath fastened for thee thy swathings. 
“Hail, Nefer-uben-f, the god Ptah-Sekri hath given 
“unto thee of the ornaments of the divine house which 
“he hath. (5) Hail, Nefer-uben-f, the god Thoth him- 
“self cometh unto thee with the books of holy words, 
‘‘and he maketh thy hand [to reach] unto the horizon, 
“even unto the place [wherein] thy ka loveth to be; 
“and Osiris worketh [for thee on] the night of journey- 
“ing unto life. Thy white crown (6) is stablished on 
‘thy brow. The god Nemu is with thee, and he giveth 
‘‘unto thee fine feathered fowl. Hail, Osiris Nefer- 
‘“uben-f, triumphant, thou hast been set in order upon 
“thy funeral couch; thou comest forth, and Ra (7) 
“who isin the hidden horizon within his boat hath 
“set thee in order. Hail, Osiris Nefer-uben-f, trium- 
“phant, the god Tem, the father of the gods, hath 
“made for thee the things which are to endure for 
“ever. Hail, Osiris Nefer-uben-f, triumphant, (8) the 
“god Amsu of Qebti hath set thee in order, and the 
“gods of the shrine praise thee. Hail, Osiris Nefer- 
“uben-f, with two-fold happiness thou settest out in 


Chap. clxx.15] OF ARRANGING THE FUNERAL BED 579 


“peace to thine everlasting habitation and to thine 
“abode of eternity. Homage is paid unto thee (9) in 
“the cities of Pe and Tepu in the shrine which thy ka 
“loveth and before thine abode, and thou art the 
maenty one of soula;c 2. a oo Ts. and hath 
“set thee in order, and the gods embrace thee. (10) 
“Thou art like a god, and thou hast been begotten for 
“transformations which are more numerous and with 
‘“‘a created form more perfect than those of the gods. 
“Thou hast more light (?) than the Ahus and thou 
“art more mighty of souls than are those who are in 
“{them]. Hail, (11) Osiris Nefer-uben-f, Ptah on his 
“Southern Wall hath set thee in order, and he hath 
“made to advance thine abode more than [that of] the 
“oods. Hail, Osiris, the am-khent, Nefer-uben-f, thou 
“art Horus, the son of Isis, begotten of (12) Ptah ; 
“and Nut hath created [thee] a being of light like unto 
“Ra in the horizon when he illumineth the two lands 
‘“‘with his beauteous light. And the gods say unto 
“thee :—‘ Come forward, advance now and look thou 
“upon the things which are thine in thine (13) abode 
“of everlastingness.’ The goddess Rennutet, the heir 
“and first-born of Tem, hath set thee in order in the 
“presence of the company of the gods (14) of Nut. I, 
“even J, am the heir of heaven, and the fellow of the 
“God who maketh his light. I have come forth from 
‘the womb, and I shall grow young again even as doth 
“(15) my father, and I shall not be prevented from 
“making [my] answer in my season.” 


580 OF THE GARMENT OF PURITY ([Chap. clxxi. 1 


CHAPTER CLXXI. 


[From the Papyrus of Amen-hetep (see Mariette, Papyrus de 
Boulag, Tom. III. Pl. 7).] 


Vignette : This Chapter has no vignette. 


Text: (1) THE CHAPTER OF TYING ON THE GAR- 
MENT OF PURITY (db). 


“OQ Tem, O Shu, O Tefnut, O Seb, O Nut, O Osiris, 
“O Isis, O Set, O Nephthys, (2) O Heru-khuti (Har- 
“machis), O Hathor in the Great House, O Khepera, 
“© Menthu, the lord of Thebes, O Amen, the lord of 
“the thrones of the two lands, O Great Company of 
“the gods, O Little Company of the gods, O gods and 
‘‘ goddesses who dwell in (8) Nu, O Sebek of the two 
“ Meht, O Sebek in all thy manifold names in thine 
“every place wherein thy Ka hath delight, O gods (4) 
“of the south, O gods of the north, O ye who are in 
‘heaven, O ye who are upon earth, grant ye (5) this 
‘‘oarment of purity to the perfect Khu of Amen-hetep. 
“Grant ye your strength [unto him], (6) and destroy 
“ye [all] the evil which belongeth unto Amen-hetep by 
“means of this garment of purity. Hold [ye] him 
“guiltless, then, for ever and ever, and destroy ye [all] 
“the evil which belongeth unto him.” 


Chap. clxxii. 6] PRAISE IN THE UNDERWORLD 581 


CHAPTER CLXXII. 
[From the Papyrus of Nebseni (Brit. Mus. No. 9900, sheets 32, 33). ] 
Vignette: This Chapter has no vignette. 


Text: (1) “THE FIRST OF THE CHAPTERS OF THE 
ARRANGEMENTS (OR PRAISINGS) WHICH ARE TO BE 
PERFORMED IN THE UNDERWORLD. 


“(I snuff] the det incense, I inhale the scent of 
““hesmen (natron) and (2) incense. .... , I am pure 
“with the purity of -..... , [pure are] the praises 
“which come forth from my mouth, more pure than 
Eamaay (| )atselt.(3) 29%... 2°. of the fish that are in 
“the river; to the statue of the Temple of Hesmen 
“(natron). Pure are the praises (4) of the scribe 
‘“‘Nebseni, the designer of the house of gold, begotten 
‘“‘of the scribe and designer Thena, triumphant, born 
“of the lady of the house Mut-restha, triumphant. And 
“as for the scribe Nebseni, the lord of piety, who is 
“happy with a two-fold happiness, (5) Ptah hath a 
“favour unto him, and He of the Southern Wall hath 
“a favour unto him, and every god hath a favour unto 
“him, and every goddess hath a favour unto him. 
“Thy beauties are a stream (6) [bearing] things which 
“cause rest and are like unto water which floweth 


582 PRAISE IN THE UNDERWORLD [Chap. clxxii. 7 


“nearer (?); thy beauties are like a hall of festival 
“wherein each man may exalt his [own] god; thy 
“beauties are like unto the pillar of the god Ptah 
(7) and like the courtyard of incense (?) of Ra. Neb- 
“seni, the scribe and designer of the Temple of Ptah, 
“hath been made a pillar of Ptah, and the libation 
‘“‘vase of the god of the Southern Wall.” 

I. (8) “ Hail, verily thou art invoked ; hail, verily, 
“thou art invoked. Hail, verily thou art lamented. 
“Verily, thou art praised; verily, thou art exalted ; 
“verily, thou art glorious; verily, thou art strong. 
“Hail, thou scribe Nebseni, thou who hast been raised 
“up, (9) thou art raised up by means of the ceremonies 
“which have been performed for thee. Thine enemies 
“have fallen and the god Ptah hath thrown down head- 
“Jong (10) thy foes; thou hast triumphed over them 
“and thou hast gained power over them. They obey 
“thy words and they perform that which thou orderest 
“them [to do]; thou art raised up, and thy word is a 
“law unto the divine sovereign chiefs of every god, and 
“of every goddess.” (11) 

Il. “ Hail, verily thou art invoked ; hail, verily thou 
“art invoked. Thy head, O my lord, is a standard 
“with locks of rippling hair like unto the hair of a 
“woman of Asia; thy face shineth more brightly than 
“the House (12) of the Moon-god; the upper part of 
“thy head is azure in colour; thy locks are blacker 
“than the doors of the underworld; thy hair is dark 
“as night ; thy visage is decorated with an azure blue; 


Chap. clxxii, 20] PRAISE IN THE UNDERWORLD 583 


(13) the rays of Ra are upon thy face; thy garments 
“are of gold which Horus hath deftly ornamented with 
“azure blue; thine eye-brows are the two sister god- 
“‘desses who are at peace with each other whom Horus 
“(14) hath deftly ornamented with azure blue; thy 
“nose snuffeth in and thy nostrils exhale as it were 
“the winds from heaven. Thine eyes look towards 
(15) Mount Bakhau of the rising sun; thine eye- 
“lashes are fixed each day, and the upper eyelids to 
“which they belong are of veritable lapis-lazuli; the 
“apples of thine eyes are [as] offerings of peace (?) ; 
‘“‘and the lower eyelids are filled with (16) eye-paint of 
“mestchem. Thy two lips give unto thee law, they 
“repeat unto [thee] the law of Ra, and they make to 
“be at peace the hearts of the gods. Thy teeth are the 
“two heads (17) of the serpent goddess Mehen which 
“sport (?) with the Horus gods; thy tongue is made 
“skilful; thy speech is more shrill than that of the 
“teheru bird of the field; thy jawbones are starry 
“lamps; (18) thy breasts (?) are stablished upon their 
“seats; and they journey unto the funeral mountain 
‘of Amentet.” 

III. “[Hail, verily thou art invoked; hail, verily 
“thou art invoked.| Thy neck is decorated with gold, 
“and (19) it is girt about (?) with refined copper. Thy 
“oullet and throat are those of Anpu; thy bones are 
“the bones of the two Uatch goddesses ; thy backbone 
“is (20) studded with gold, and is girt about (?) with 
“refined copper ; thy loins (?) are those of Nephthys; 


584 PRAISE IN THE UNDERWORLD [Chap. clxxii. 2x 


“thy ...is a Nile which is without water; thy 
“buttocks (21) are two crystal eggs; thy thighs are 
“strong for walking; thou sittest upon thy seat; and 
“the gods [give] (22) unto thee duoue eyes, O scribe 
‘““Nebseni, thou lord of piety.” 

IV. ‘“[Hail, verily thou art invoked; hail, verily 
“thou artinvoked.] Thy throat is the throat of Anpu; 
“thy members (23) are plated with gold ; thy breasts 
“are two crystal eggs which Horus hath deftly orna- 
“mented with azure blue; thy shoulders are made like 
“unto crystal ; thine arms (24) are stablished through 
“the strength which protecteth them; thy heart is 
“olad each day; thy breast is of the work of the two 
“divine Forms; thy person adoreth the starry deities 
‘who dwell in the heights and depths of heaven ; (25) 
“thy belly is, as it were, the heavens; thy navel is the 
“Tuat (i.e, underworld) which is open, and which 
“ordereth the light in the darkness, and the offerings 
“of which are (26) dnkham flowers. And Nebseni 
“praiseth the majesty of Thoth, the beloved one, 
“‘lsaying|:—‘ May his beauties be in my tomb, and 
“may all the purity which he loveth (27) be there 
“even as my God hath commanded for me.’ ” 

V. “ Hail, verily thou art invoked ; hail, verily thou 
“art invoked. Thy two hands are a pool of water in 
“the season of an abundant inundation, a pool of water 
“fringed about with the divine offering of the water- 
“god. Thy (28) thighs are encircled with gold; thy 
“knees are the plants of the waters which are the nests 


Chap. clxxii. 35] PRAISE IN THE UNDERWORLD 585 


“of the birds ; thy feet are stablished each day; thy 
“legs lead thee into a (29) path of happiness, O scribe 
“Nebseni, thou favoured one. Thy hands and arms 
“are pillars.(?) [set] upon their pedestals; thy fingers 
“are strips (?) of gold, the nails of which are like sharp 
“flakes (30) of flint by reason of the works which they 
“perform for thee.” 

VI. “Hail, verily thou art invoked; hail, verily 
“thou art invoked. Thou clothest thyself with the 
“garment of purity (abu), and behold, thou drawest off 
“from thyself the wmet garment when (81) thou goest 
“up to stretch thyself upon the couch (?). Haunches 
“of meat are cut for thy ka, O scribe Nebseni, and a 
“breast (or heart) of the animal is offered unto thy 
“sadhu. Thou receivest a garment of the finest linen 
‘(32) from the hands of the ministrant (?) of Ra; thou 
“eatest the cakes upon the cloth which the goddess 
“Tait herself hath prepared; thou eatest the haunch 
“of the animal (33); thou takest boldly the joint which 
‘Ra hath endowed with power in his holy place; thou 
‘““washest thy feet in the silver basins which the god 
“Seker, the artificer, hath wrought; and behold, (34) 
“thou eatest of the cake which appeareth on the altar 
“and which the two divine fathers have sanctified. 
“Thou eatest of the baked bread and of the hot meats 
‘of the storehouse; thou (35) smellest the flowers ; 
“thy heart feareth not [to advance] to the altar of the 
‘offerings made to thee; and those who feed thee with 
“food make for thee the loaves and bread-cakes of the 


586 PRAISE IN THE UNDERWORLD [Chap. clxxii. 36 


“ Souls of Annu (Heliopolis), (86) and they themselves 
‘bear them unto thee. Thine offerings (?) are ordered 
“for thee, and thy ordinances are in the gates of the 
“Great House. Thou risest up like Sah (Orion) ; thou 
‘‘arrivest like the star Bau; (37) and the goddess Nut 
“[stretcheth out] her hands unto thee.. Sah (Orion), 
“the son of Ra, and Nut, who gave birth to the gods— 
“the two mighty gods in heaven—speak each to the 
“other, saying, (38) ‘Take the scribe and draughtsman 
“Nebseni into thine arms, and I will take him into 
‘mine on this day, and let us make happiness for him 
“when praises are sung to him and when mention is 
“made of him, and when [his name] is in the mouth 
“of all young men and maidens.’ (89) Thou art raised 
“up, [O Nebseni,] and thou hearest the songs of com- 
“memoration through the door of thy house.” 

VII. “Hail, verily thou art invoked; hail, verily 
“thou art invoked. Anubis hath bestowed upon thee 
“thy winding-sheet, he hath (40) wrought [for thee] 
“according to his will, he hath provided thee with the 
“ornaments of his bandages, for he is the overseer of 
“the great god. Thou settest out-on thy way and thou 
‘hast been washed in the Lake of Perfection; thou 
“‘makest offerings in the celestial mansions, and thou 
‘‘propitiatest (41) the lords of Annu (Heliopolis). The 
“water of Ra is presented unto thee in vessels, and 
“milk in large vases. Thou art raised up and thou 
“makest offerings upon the altar, thou washest thy 
“feet upon the stone of ...... (42) on the banks 


Chap. clxxii. 46] PRAISE IN THE UNDERWORLD 587 


“of the Lake of God. Thou comest forth and thou 
“seest Ra upon the pillars which are the arms of 
“heaven, upon the head of An-mut-f and upon the 
“arms of Ap-uat; he openeth out for thee a way. 
“(43) and thou seest the horizon wherein is the 
“lace of purity which thou lovest.” 

VIII. “Hail, verily thou art invoked; hail, verily 
“thou art invoked. Offerings are allotted unto thee 
“in the presence of Ra, and according to that which 
“Horus and Thoth ordered for thee thou hast had a 
“beginning and an end. (44) They invoke thee, O 
“scribe Nebseni, and see thy splendour there, causing 
“thee to come forth [as] a god (45) and to advance to 
“the Souls of Annu. Thou goest forth upon the great 
“roads in thy Sah, who hast received the offerings of 
“thy father upon thy two hands; thou art furnished 
“with linen garments each day, at the beginning of 
“the journey of the god through the gates of the (46) 
“Great House.” 

TX. “Hail, verily thou art invoked; hail, verily 
“thou art invoked. The scribe Nebseni hath air for 
‘‘his nose and breath for his nostrils, and one thousand 
“geese, and fifty baskets of pure and fair offerings. 
“Hail, Nebseni, thine enemies have fallen down head- 
‘Jong and they shall nevermore exist.” 


588 THE ADDRESSES OF HORUS [Chap. clxxiii. 


CHAPTER, CLXXITI. 


[From the Papyrus of Nebseni (Brit. Mus. Ne. 9900, sheets 9 
and 10). ] 


WITT ITT 


XY 


i Vj Fees i 


Vignette: “Osiris, the great god, the lord of Abtu, the lord 

of transformations, the prince of eternity,” seated in a shrine ; 

to the left of the text the deceased stands, with hands raised 

in adoration, before the god, and the ground between them is 

covered with the bodies of birds and beasts which have been 
prepared for sacrifice (see pp. 890, 391). 


Chap, clxxiii. 10] THE ADDRESSES OF HORUS 589 


Text: THE SPEECHES oF Horus TO HIS DIVINE 
FATHER OSIRIS WHEN HE ENTERETH IN TO SEE HIM, 
AND WHEN HE COMETH FORTH FROM NEAR THE 
GREAT ABT CHAMBER TO LOOK UPON RA AS UN-NEFER, 
THE LORD OF TA-TCHESERT; THEN DOTH EACH EM- 
BRACE THE OTHER AT THE PLEASURE OF HIS KHu, 
THERE IN THE UNDERWORLD. (1) A Hymn of Praise 
to Osiris, governor of those in the underworld, the 
great god, the lord of Abydos, the king of eternity, 
the prince of everlastingness, the holy god in Re-stau, 
(2) by the scribe Nebseni, who saith :— (3) 

“‘T ascribe praise unto thee, O lord of the gods, thou 
“God One, who livest (4) upon right and truth, behold, 
“T thy son Horus come unto thee; (5) I have avenged 
‘thee, and I have brought to thee madt—even to the 
‘place where is the company of thy gods. (6) Grant 
“thou that I may have my being among those who are 
“in thy following, for I have overthrown all thy (7) 
“foes, and I have stablished all those who are of thy 
“substance upon the earth for ever and ever.” 

[Here follow forty declarations, each of which is 
preceded by the words “Hail, Osiris, I am thy 
Son. - 

(8) “I have come, and I have avenged [thee,O my 
“father Osiris]. 

(9) “I have come, and I have overthrown for thee 
“thine enemies. 

(10) “I have come, and I have done away with every 
‘evil thing which belongeth unto thee. 


590 THE ADDRESSES OF HORUS  [Chap. clxxiii. sx 


(11) “I have come, and [have slain for thee him that 
“attacked thee. 

(12) “I have come, and I have sent forth mine arm 
‘fagainst those who were hostile towards thee. 

(13) “I have come, and I have brought unto thee 
“the fiends of Set with their fetters upon them. 


(14) “I have come, and I have brought unto thee 
“the land of the South, and I have united unto thee 
“the land of the North. 

(15) “I have come, and I have stablished for thee 
“divine offerings from the South and from the North. 

(16) “I have come, and I have ploughed! for thee 
“the fields. 

(17) “I have come, and I have filled for thee the 
“canals with water. 

(18) “I have come, and I have hoed up for thee the 
“oround., 

(19) “J have come, and | have built cisterns for thee. 

(20) “I have come, and I have gone round about the 
“soil for thee. 

(21) “I have come, and I have made sacrificial 
“victims of those who were hostile to thee. 


1 The text actually has, ‘‘I have overthrown.” 


Chap. clxxiii. 32] THE ADDRESSES OF HORUS 591 


(22) “I have come, and I have made sacrifices unto 
“thee of thine animals and victims for slaughter. 

(23) “T have come, and I have supplied [thee] with 
“food in abundance [of the creatures which are upon 
“earth |]. 

(24) ““T have come, and I have brought unto thee 


Ont i “Cie 


(26) “I have come, and I have smitten for thee 
“emasculated beasts. 

(27) “I have come, and I have netted for thee birds 
‘“‘and feathered fowl, : 

(28) “I have come, and I have taken captive for 
‘thee thine enemies in their chains. 

(29) “T have come, and I have fettered for thee thine 
‘“‘enemies with fetters. 

(30) “I have come, and I have brought for thee cool 
“water from Abu (Elephantine), wherewith thou 
‘mayest refresh thine heart. 

(31) “I have come, and I have brought unto thee 
“herbs of every kind. 

(32) “I have come, and I have stablished for thee 
“those who are of thy substance daily. 


592 THE ADDRESSES OF HORUS [Chap, clxxiii. 33 


(33) “I have come, and I have made thy cakes in 
“the city of Pe of the red barley. 

(34) “I have come, and I have made thy ale in the 
“city of Tepu of the white grain. ¥ 

(35) “I have come, and I have ploughed for thee 
“wheat and barley in Sekhet-Aaru. 

(36) “I have come, and I have reaped it for thee 
“therein. 

(37) ‘I have come, and I have glorified thee. 

(38) “I have come, and I have given [to thee] thy 
“souls. 

(39) “I have come, and I have given [to thee] thy 
“power. 

(40) “I have come, and I have given [to thee thy] 

(41) “I have come, and I have given [to thee thy] 

(42) “T have come, and I have given [to thee] thy 
“* terror. 

(43) “T have come, and I have given [to thee] thy 
“victory. 

(44) “TI have come, and I have given to thee thine 
“eyes, [which are] the plumes on thy head, 

(45) “T have come, and I have given [to thee] Isis 
“and Nephthys that they may stablish thee. 

(46) “I have come, and I have filled for thee the 
“Kye of Horus [with] oil (or unguent). 

(47) “I have come, and I have brought unto thee the 
“Kye of Horus, whereby thy face shall be destroyed.” 


Ch, clxxiv.3] OF MAKING THE SPIRIT TO APPEAR 593 


CHAPTER CLXXIV. 


[From the Papyrus of Mut-hetep (Brit. Mus. No. 10,010, sheet 3).] 


Vignette : The deceased standing with her back towards a 
door from which she has just come forth. 


Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF CAUSING THE KHU TO 
COME FORTH FROM THE GREAT DOOR.’ Mut-hetepeth, 
triumphant, saith :— 


“Thy son hath offered up for thee [a sacrifice |, and 
“the divine mighty ones tremble (2) when they look 
“upon the slaughtering knife which is in thy hand 
“[when] thou comest forth from the Tuat. Homage 
“to thee, O god Saa, the god Seb hath created thee, 
“and the company of the gods have given birth unto 
“thee, (3) Horus resteth upon his Hye, and the god 
“Tem resteth upon his years, and the gods of the east 

1 For the original form of this Chapter as found in the 


Pyramid of Unas, see Maspero, Recueil de Travauw, tom. IV. 
p. 43, ll. 379—399. 


WOE TL. Et 


594 OF MAKING THE SPIRIT TO APPEAR [Cnh. clxxiv. 4 


“and of the west rest upon the mighty one who hath 
“come into existence within [thy] hand. (4) A god 
‘hath been born [now that] I have been born; I see 
“and I have sight; I have my existence; I am lifted 
“up upon my place; [I have] done what hath been 
“decreed ; (5) [I] hate slumber; I have endowed with 
“might the feeble one. He that dwelleth in the city 
“of Netet hath made cakes for me im the city of Pe, 
“and I have received [my form] in Annu, for. it is 
“ Horus who hath commanded (6) what shall be done 
“for his father the lord of winds (?), and the god Set 
“quaketh ; he hath raised me up, and Tem hath raised 
“meup. O, Iam the mighty one, (7) and I have come 
“forth from between the thighs of the company of the 
“oods. Ihave been conceived by Sekhet (8) and by 
“(Shes-|Khentet, and I have been brought forth at 
“the door of the star Sept (Sothis), the foremost (?) one 
“who with long strides (9) bringeth along the celestial 
“path of Ra day by day. I have come to my habita- 
“tion (10) as prince of the North and South, and I rise 
“(or I am crowned) in the gate. Hail, thou of the (11) 
“double plumes who art called by the name of Mi- 
“shepes, I am the lotus (12) which shineth in the 
“Land of Purity and which hath received me and 
“which maketh my abode at the nostrils of the Great 
“Form, (13) I have come into the Lake of Flame, and 
“T have placed right and truth in the Place of Sin. 
(14) Iam the watcher of the sesherw garments, and 
“the watcher of the Uraeus on the night of the flood 


Ch, clxxiv. 19] OF MAKING THE SPIRIT TO APPEAR 595 


“of the Great one. (15) I rise like Nefer-Tem, who is 
“the lotus at the nostrils of Ra, when he cometh forth 
“from the horizon each day; and the gods are purified 
“at the (16) sight of the lady of the house Mut- 
“hetepeth, who is triumphant before the Kas and 
“who gathereth together hearts for Saau-ur, whom 
(17) the god, Saa-Amenti-Ra, holdeth (?). I have 
“eome upon my seat before the Kas, and I have 
“oathered together hearts for Saa-urt, and I have 
“my being (18) as Saa whom Ra the god of Amenti 
“holdeth (?); and the tehetch implement is with me, 
“T recite the mighty [words] which are in the heart 
“on the festival of the Ansi garment, and I am Sa- 
“ Amenti(19)-Ra, the strong (?) of heart within the 
“hidden chamber of Nu.” 


596 OF AVOIDING THE SECOND DEATH [Ch. clxxv.1 


CHAPTER CLXXY. 


[From the Papyrus of Ani (Brit. Mus. No. 10,470, sheet 29). ] 


Vignette : The deceased and his wife standing, with hands 

raised in adoration, before the god Thoth, who is seated upon 

a pylon-shaped throne, and has the emblem of “life” upon his 
knees. 


Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF NOT DYING A SECOND 
TIME. Osiris, the scribe Ani, triumphant, saith :— (2) 

“Hail, Thoth! What is it that hath happened unto 
“the divine children of Nut? (3) They have done 
“battle, they have upheld strife, they have done evil, 
“(4) they have created the fiends, they have made 
‘slaughter, they have caused (5) trouble; in truth, in 
‘all their doings the mighty have worked against the 
“weak. (6) Grant, O might of Thoth, that that which 
‘the god Tem hath decreed [may be done}! And thou 


Ch. clxxv. 16] OF AVOIDING THE SECOND DEATH 597 


“regardest not evil, nor art thou (7) provoked to anger 
“when they bring their years to confusion and throng 
‘in and push to disturb their months; for in all that 
“they have done (8) unto thee they have worked 
“iniquity in secret. I am thy writing palette, O 
“Thoth, and I have brought unto thee thine ink-jar. 
“T am not (9) of those who work iniquity in their 
“secret places; let not evil happen unto me.” 

Saith Osiris, the scribe Ani:— (10) “Hail, Tmu! 
“What manner [of land] is this into which I have 
“come? It hath not water, it hath not air; it is depth 
“unfathomable, (11) it is black as the blackest night, 
“and men wander helplessly therein. In it a man may 
“not live in quietness of heart ; nor may the longings 
“of love be satisfied (12) therein. But let the state of 
“the shining ones be given unto me instead of water 
“and air and the satisfying of the longings of love, and 
“Jet quietness of heart be given unto me instead of 
“cakes (13) and ale. The god Tem hath decreed that 
‘“‘T shall see thy face, and that I shall not suffer from 
“the things which pain thee. May every god transmit 
“unto thee (14) his throne for millions of years. ‘Thy 
“throne hath descended unto thy son Horus, and the 
“ood Tem hath decreed that his course shall be among 
“the holy princes. (15) In truth, he shall rule over 
“thy throne, and he shall be heir of the throne of the 
“Dweller in the Lake of Double Fire. In truth, it 
“hath been decreed that in me he shall see his like- 
“ness, and that my face (16) shall look upon the face 


598 OF AVOIDING THE SECOND DEATH [Ch. clxxv. 17 


“of the lord Tem. How long then have I to live ? It 


“ig decreed that thou shalt live for millions of millions 
‘of years, a life of millions of years. (17) May it be 
“oranted unto me that I pass on unto the holy princes, 
‘for indeed, I am doing away with all the wrong which 
“T did, from the time when this earth came into being 
“from Nu (18), when it sprang from the watery abyss 
“even as it was in the days of old. I am Fate (or 
“'Time) and Osiris, and I have made my transforma- 
“tions into the likeness of divers (19) serpents. Man 
“knoweth not, and the gods cannot behold, the two-fold 
“beauty which I have made for Osiris, who is greater 
“than all the gods. I have given unto him (20) the 
“region of the dead. And verily, his son Horus is 
“seated upou the throne of the Dweller in the Lake of 
“ Double Fire, as his heir. I have made him to have 
‘his throne (21) in the boat of millions of years. 
“Horus is stablished upon his throne, [among his] 
“friends and all that belonged unto him. Verily, the 
“soul of Set, which (22) is. greater than all the gods, 
“hath departed. May it be granted that I bind his 
‘soul in the divine boat (23) at my (?) will, and that 
‘‘The| may have fear of the divine body. O my father 
“Osiris, thou hast done for me that which thy father 
“Ra did for thee. May I abide upon the earth last- 
“ingly ; (24) may I keep possession of my throne; may 
“my heir be strong; may my tomb and my friends who 
“are upon earth flourish; (25) may my enemies be 
“oiven over to destruction and to the shackles of the 


Ch. elxxv. 26] OF AVOIDING THE SECOND DEATH = 599 


“goddess Serq. Iam thy son, and Ra is my father, 
(26) For me likewise thou hast made life, strength, 
“and health. Horus is established upon his throne. 
“Grant thou that the days of my life may come unto 
“worship and honour.” 


The remains of a much longer version of this Chapter 
have been found in the papyrus of “a scribe of the 
offerings of the King of the North and South,” called 
Ra (see Lepsius, op. cit., Bd. I. Bll. 198, 199), and from 
these we may see that the happiness of the deceased in 
the underworld was more fully described therein. No 
connected sense can, however, be given to this version, 
for the beginnings and ends of the lines of the text of 
the Chapter are wanting almost throughout. From the 
Rubric we learn that the Chapter was “to be recited 
over a figure of Horus made of lapis-lazuli which was 
to be laid upon the neck of the deceased,” and that the 
performance of this ceremony was believed to be most 
efficacious in securing important benefits for the dead. 


600 OF AVOIDING THE SECOND DEATH [Ch. clxsvi. 


CHAPTER CLXXVIL 
[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 22). ] 
Vignette: This Chapter is without vignette. 


Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF NOT DYING A SECOND 
TIME. The Osiris Nu, the overseer of the house of the 
overseer of the seal, triumphant, saith :— 


“That which I abominate is the land of the East. 
“Let me not enter into the torture chamber. Let 
“there not be done unto me any of those (2) things 
“which the gods hold in abomination, for behold [I] 
“have passed as a pure being through the Mesqet 
“chamber. And let the god Neb-er-tcher grant unto 
“me his glorious power on the day of burial (3) in the 


” 


“presence of the Lord of Things. 


RUBRIC: If [the deceased] know this chaptcr he shall 
become like a perfect Aiw in the underworld. 


Ch. clxxvii. 6.] OP RAISING= UP fHE SPIRIT 601 


CHAPTER CLXXVII. 
[From the Papyrus of Nebseni (Brit. Mus. No. 9900, sheet 18). ] 


Vignette: The deceased standing upright; pure water is 
being poured out before him, and offerings of linen garments 
are being made unto him. 


Text: (1) THE CHAPTER OF RAISING UP THE KHU 
AND OF MAKING THE SOUL TO LIVE IN THE UNDER- 
WoRLD. The scribe Nebseni, the draughtsman of the 
Temple of Ptah, the lord of piety who is in the favour 
of his god, saith :— (2) 

“Hail,] Nut,' Nut who castest thy father to earth 
“and settest (?) Horus behind him, his wings grow like 
“those of | a hawk, and his plumes like (3) [those of] 
‘““him who seeth (?). His soul hath been brought unto 
“him, he is filled with words [of magical power], 
‘and his place is decreed for him opposite to (4) the 
“stars of the heaven, for behold thou art a star of Nut 
“by thyself . . . Thou seest the scribe Nebseni, the 
“Jord of piety, [in] happiness, (5) and giving his com- 
“mands unto the Khus; and behold, the divine Power 
“(or Prince) is not [among them], and thy . . . is not 
“among them, unless thou art among them. Thou 
“‘seest the chief Nebseni, the scribe (6) and draughts- 


1 For an original form of this text as found in the Pyramid of 
Unas, see Maspero, Recueil de Travaux, tom. IV. 1. 361 ff. 


602 OF RAISING UP THE SPIRIT [Ch. clxxvii. 7 


“man of the Temple of Ptah, in the form of a soul who 
“hath the horns of the cows Smamet and An-unser the 
“Black. [Hail,] children of Serat-Beqet, who have 
“sucked milk from (7) the four Uaipw cows (?), Horus 
“of the blue eyes cometh unto you; protect ye Horus 
“of the red eyes who is sick. Let not his soul be 
“turned back, (8) let his offerings be brought [unto 
him], let the things which are for his benefit (?) be 
“carried to him; and let them come upon the shoulder 
“over the West. This only one advanceth to thee. 
“The God speaketh thy words ..... (9); the gods 
“make thy name to be triumphant before the gods, and 
“the company of the gods distinguish thee with their 
“hands. The God of the Field of the gods speaketh, 
“and thou gainest the power over the door of Kas in 
“their horizon ; they unbolt (10) for thee their doors, 
‘for they have a favour unto thee, and thou gainest 
“power over their shrines. The god [Seb and his 
“company of gods enter in], and they come forth 
“lifting on high (11) their faces, and they look 
“upon thee in the presence of the great god Amsu 
Pec eee. thy head .... thy head. I [make to] 
“stand up thy head [for thee], and thou hast power 
“thereover. His head diminisheth behind thee, but 
“thy head shall not diminish, and thou shalt not be 
“destroyed, and thou shalt do what thou hast to do 
“before men and before the gods.” 


Ch, clxxviii. 5] OF RAISING UP THE BODY 603 


CHAPTER CLXXVIII. 
[From the Papyrus of Nebseni (Brit. Mus. No. 9900, sheet 19). ] 
Vignette: This Chapter has no vignette. 


Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF RAISING UP THE DEAD 
BODY, [OF GIVING SIGHT TO] THE EYES, OF GAINING 
POWER OVER THE EARS, OF STABLISHING (2) THE 
HEAD, AND OF PROVIDING THE FACE WITH THE POWER 
OF PROTECTION. The Osiris, the scribe Nebseni, the 
draughtsman of the Temple of Ptah, the lord of piety, 
saith :— | 


“The Hye of Horus is presented unto thee, and it 
“feedeth thee with the food of offerings. Hail,’ ye 
“who make the (3) labourers to rejoice and who raise 
“un the heart and purify the body, who have eaten the 
“Hye of Horus, thou Olive tree in Annu, (4) destroy ye 
“Twhat evil there is] in the body of [Osiris] Nebseni, 
“the scribe and draughtsman in the Temple of Ptah. 
“QO Osiris, let him not suffer thirst before his god, let 
“him suffer neither hunger nor thirst, and let the god 
(5) Khas (?) carry them away, and let him do away 
“with his hunger, O thou that fillest, O thou that fillest 
“hearts. O chiefs who dispense cakes [and ale], O ye 

1 Wor a very ancient form of the text of this Chapter as found in 


the Pyramid of Unas, see Maspero, Recueil de Travaua, tome III. 
Unas, |. 166 ff. 


604 OF RAISING UP THE BODY (Ch, clxxvili. 6 


‘“‘who have charge of (6) the water flood, command ye 
“that cakes and ale be given unto the Osiris Nebseni 
“even as Ra himself commanded this thing. And 
“moreover, Ra hath commanded those who are over 
“the abundance of the (7) year to take handfuls of 
‘wheat and barley and to give them to him for his 
“cakes, for behold, he is a great bull; [these] shall ye 
“oive to the Osiris Nebseni. O guardian of the five 
“cakes in (8) the divine house, three cakes are in 
“heaven before Ra, and two are upon earth before 
“the company of the gods; may he burst through 
‘Nu, may he see, may he see! O Ra, be gracious 
“unto the scribe (9) Nebseni this day, be gracious. 
“The scribe Nebseni is as a lord of piety according 
“to the command of Shu and Isis, and he hath been 
“united (10) unto the piety of happiness before his 
“ood. May [the gods] give cakes and ale unto the 
“seribe Nebseni, and may they prepare for him all 
“good and pure things (11) this happy day, things for 
“journeying and travelling, things of the Eye of Horus, 
“things of the boat (?), and all things which should 
“enter into the sight of the god. Thou shalt have 
“power over the water, and thou shalt advance to (12) 
“the table of offerings having cakes (?) and four 
“measures (?) of water. The Eye of Horus hath 
“ordered these things for the scribe Nebseni, and the 
“god Shu hath ordered the [means of] subsistence for 
“him, (13) [both] cakes and ale. Watch, O judges 
“of the form (?) of Thoth, watch him that lieth in 


Ch, clxxviii, 2x] OF RAISING UP THE BODY 605 


“death. Wake up, O thou that dwellest in [Kenset]! 
“Grant thou offerings (14) in the presence of Thoth, 
“the mighty god, who cometh forth from Hapi (:.e., 
“the Nile), and of Ap-uat who cometh forth from 
“ Asert, for the mouth of Nebseni, the scribe and de- 
“sioner of the (15) Temple of Ptah, is pure. The 
“company of the gods offer incense to the scribe 
‘““Nebseni, and his mouth is pure, and his tongue 
“which is therein is right and true. That which 
(16) the scribe Nebseni abominateth is filth, and he 
“hath freed himself therefrom even as Set freed him- 
“self [from it] in the city of Rehiu, and he hath set 
“out [with] Thoth for heaven (17). O ye who have 
“delivered the scribe Nebseni along with yourselves, 
“let him eat of that whereof ye eat, let him drink of 
“that whereof ye drink, let him sit down upon that 
‘‘whereon (18) ye sit, let him be strong in the strength 
“wherein ye are strong, let him sail about where ye 
“sail about; the scribe Nebseni hath drawn the net 
“tooether in the (19) region of Aaru, and he hath run- 
“ning water in Sekhet-hetep, and his offerings are 
“among [those of | the gods. The water of the scribe 
““Nebseni (20) is the wine of Ra, and Nebseni goeth 
“yound about heaven and travelleth [therein] like unto 
“Thoth. Itis an abomination unto the scribe Nebseni 
“to suffer hunger and not to eat, and it is an abomina- 
“tion unto him (21) to be thirsty [and not to drink]; 
“but sepulchral meals have been given unto him by 
“the lord of eternity, who hath ordered [these things] 


606 OF RAISING UP THE BODY [Ch, clxxviii. 22 


“for him. The scribe Nebseni was conceived in (22) 
“the night, and was brought forth in the daylight, and 
‘those who are in the following of Ra, the divine an- 
“cestors, adore [him]. [The scribe Nebseni] was con- 
“ceived in Nu, and was brought forth in Nu, and he 
“hath come! and hath brought to you what he hath 
(23) found of that which the Kye of Horus hath shed 
“upon the branches of the Then tree. The governor 
“of those in Amenti cometh to him and bringeth to 
“him the divine food and offerings of Horus, (24) the 
‘“ oovernor of Temples, and upon that whereon he doth 
“live the scribe Nebseni liveth also, and of that whereof 
‘“‘he drinketh doth the scribe Nebseni, the designer of 
“the (25) Temple of Ptah, drink also, and facing his 
“offerings of cakes and ale is a haunch of meat 
“also, Osiris, the scribe Nebseni, is triumphant, and 
“he is favoured of Anubis (26) who is upon his 
ioe’: 

“Hail, scribe Nebseni, thou hast the form wherein 
“thou hadst thine existence upon earth, and thou livest 
“and renewest thy youth each day; thy face is un- 
“covered and thou seest (27) the lord of the horizon, 
“who giveth to thee sepulchral meals in thy hour and 
‘in thy season of night. Horus hath avenged thee, 
“and he hath destroyed the jaw-bones (28) of thine 
“enemies ; he hath shut in the doer of violence at-the 
“mouth of his fortress.” 


' These words are added from the Pyramid of Unas, !1. 199, 200. 


Ch. clxxviii. 35] OF RAISING UP THE BODY 607 


“Hail, scribe Nebseni, thou hast no enemies in Het- 
“ur,! (29) and the scales balanced when thou wert 
“weighed therein, and the Hall wherein they were 
“belonged to Osiris, the lord of offerings of Amentet. 
“And thou shalt enter in at will, and thou shalt see 
(30) the Great God in his form, and life shall be given 
“to thy nostrils, and thou shalt triumph over thine 
“enemies.” 

“Hail, scribe Nebseni, what thou abominatest is (31) 
“qniquity. The divine lord of creation hath made 
“peace with thee on the night of silencing the weep- 
“ing. And sweet life, whereupon Thoth resteth, hath 
“been given unto thee from the mouth of the company 
“of the gods, (82) and thou dost triumph over thine 
“enemies, O scribe Nebseni. Thy mother Nut spreadeth 
“herself over thee * in her name of Shetet-pet, and she 
“maketh thee to be a follower (33) of the great god, 
“and to be without enemies, and she delivereth thee 
“from every evil thing in her name of Khnemet-urt, 
“the divine, mighty form who dwelleth among her (34) 
‘children, O scribe Nebseni.” 

“ Hail, chief of the hours, ancestors of Ra, make ye 
“a way for the scribe Nebseni, the lord of piety, (35) 
‘and let him pass within the circle of Osiris, the lord 
“of the life of the two lands, who liveth for ever. And 


1 T.e., the ‘‘ Great House,”’ or the Hall of Judgment. 

2 This line is found on the cover of the wooden coffin of 
Men-kau-Ra (Mycerinus), Brit. Mus. No. 6647. See my Papyrus 
of Ani, p. XX. 

3 See the Pyramid of Unas, 1. 399 f. 


608 OF ADVANCING FROM YESTERDAY [Ch. clxxviii. 36 


‘let the scribe Nebseni, the draughtsman in the Temple 
“of Ptah, the lord of piety, the happy one, (86) be in 
“the following of Nefer-Tem, the lotus at the nostrils 
“COLL RGE. 2. cee ene in the presence of the gods, and let 
“him see Ra for ever.” 


CHAPTER CLXXIX. 
[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 15). ] 
Vignette : This Chapter has no vignette. 


Text: (1) THE CHAPTER OF ADVANCING FROM 
YESTERDAY AND OF COMING FORTH BY DAY; whereby 
he and his (2) members shall be provided with food. 
The overseer of the house of the overseer of the seal, 
Nu, triumphant, the son of the overseer of the house, 
Amen-hetep, triumphant, saith :— 

“Let my speech of yesterday be given [unto me]. I 
“come daily. J have come forth from the god of crea- 
“tion, (8) I am Sepes coming forth from his Tree, and 
“Tam Nun coming forth from his might. I am the 
‘lord of the wreret, crown, and., .0-ssne oe eee 
“the god Neheb-kau (4). Iam Tesher who avengeth 
“his Hye. I died yesterday but I come to-day. The 
“mighty Lady who is the guardian of the door hath 
“made a way for me. I come forth (5) by day against 


Ch, clxxix.9] OF ADVANCING FROM YESTERDAY 609 


“mine Enemy, and I have gained the mastery over 
“him ; he hath been given over unto me, and he shall 
“not be delivered out of my hand. And he shall come 
“to an end before me inethe presence of the [great] 
“divine sovereign chiefs [' who are in the underworld. 
“The first, great rank hath been given unto me by him, 
“along with the shade and form of the living gods; 
“and I have made [my] path...... Mine Enemy 
“hath been brought unto me, and he hath been given 
“unto me, and he shall not be delivered out of my 
“hand; the things which concern me have been ended 
“in the presence of the divine sovereign chiefs of | 
“Osiris (6) who is [clothed] in his apparel. And 
“behold, the governor of those in Amenti..... ty 
“am the lord of redness on the day of transformations. 
“T am (7) the lord of knives, and injury shall not be 
“done unto me. I have made [my] path. I am the 
‘“‘seribe [who writeth down] the odorous things which 
“are in the sweet-smelling incense (?), and the things 
“which belong to the mighty Ruddy one have been 
“brought [to me], (8) and the mighty Ruddy one hath 
“been given tome. I have come forth by day against 
“my Enemy, I have brought him along, I have gained 
“the power over him; he hath been given unto me, 
“and he shall not be delivered (9) out of my hand. 
“He hath come to an end beneath me in the presence 
“of the divine sovereign chiefs, and I eat him in the 


1 The words in brackets are added from the Papyrus of Nebseni. 


VOL, III. G 


610 OF COMING FORTH BY DAY _ [Chap. clxxix. 10 


“oreat field on the altar of Uatchit; I have (10) 
“gained the mastery over him as Sekhet, the great 
“lady. Iam the lord of transformations, for I have 
“the transformations of every god, and they go round 
“GabOut 1 wa someon 


CHAPTER CLXXX. 


[From a Papyrus at Paris (see Naville, op. cit., Bd. I. BI. 204). ] 


Vignette: The deceased kneeling in supplication before 
three gods. 


Text: (1) THE CHAPTER OF COMING FORTH BY DAY, 
OF PRAISING RA IN AMENTET, OF ASCRIBING PRAISE 
UNTO THOSE WHO DWELL IN THE TUAT, OF OPENING 
UP A PATH FOR THE (2) PERFECT KHU IN THE UNDER- 
WORLD, OF CAUSING HIM TO WALK, OF MAKING LONG 
HIS FOOTSTEPS, OF GOING IN AND COMING FORTH FROM 
THE UNDERWORLD, AND OF PERFORMING TRANSFORMA- 


Chap. clxxx.10] OF COMING FORTH BY DAY 611 


TIONS LIKE A LIVING souL. (3) The Osiris..... 
triumphant, saith :— 

“Ra setteth as Osiris with all the diadems (4) of the 
“divine Khus, and of the gods of Amentet. He is the 
“One divine form, the hidden one of the Tuat, the 
“holy Soul at the head of Amentet, Un-nefer, whose 
“duration of life (5) is for ever and for ever. Words 
“of praise are addressed to thee, [O Osiris,] in the 
“Tuat, and thy son Horus hath satisfaction in thee, 
“and he hath spoken [unto thee] the decree of words. 
“ (6) Thou makest him to rise upon those who dwell in 
“the Tuat like a mighty divine Star, unto whom the 
“things which are his have been brought in the Tuat. 
“Thou travellest through it, O son of Ra, and comest 
“forth like Tem. (7) Words of praise are addressed 
“unto thee by those who dwell in the Tuat [which is] 
“the throne-chamber dear to thy Majesty, the King, 
“the Prince of Aukert, the mighty Ruler, [who is 
“crowned with] the Ureret crown, (8) the great God 
‘whose seat is hidden, the Lord and Weigher of words, 
“and the Sovereign of his divine chiefs. And words 
‘of praise are addressed unto thee by those who dwell 
“in the Tuat, and they have satisfaction [in] thee. 
“And words of praise are addressed (9) unto thee by 
“those who dwell in the Tuat, and the divine beings 
“who weep pluck out their hair for thee, and they 
“smite their hands together, and they praise thee, and 
“they ery out (10) before thee, and they weep for thee, 
“and they rejoice that thy soul hath glorified thy dead 


612 OF COMING FORTH BY DAY _ [Chap. clxxx, 11 


“body. The souls of Ra in Amentet are exalted, and 
‘in the zone (?) of the Tuat the souls... . (11) ay 
“out in their songs of exultation unto the souls of Ra 
“who dwelleth therein; the body and souls of the god 
“Tchentch dwell in the Tuat, and (12) his divine soul 
“yvesteth therein.” 

“ Hail, Osiris, I am a servant of thy temple, and one 
“who dwelleth within thy divine house; and thou 
“utterest with command the words of the decree. 
“Grant thou that I may rise like a luminary among 
“the denizens (13) of the Tuat, and like a mighty star 
“unto whom in the Tuat the things which are his have 
“been brought. Let [me] journey through it [like] the 
“son of Ra, and let [me] come forth as Tem. Let me 
‘have rest in the Tuat, (14) let me gain the mastery 
‘over the darkness, let me enter therein, let me come 
“forth therefrom, let thy hands receive me, O T'a-tiunen, 
(15) and let the Hetepu gods lift me up, O stretch ye 
“out your hands to me, for I, even I, [know your] 
“names. (16) Lead ye me along, praise ye me, O 
“Hetepu gods with your praises, for Ra rejoiceth over 
‘the praises which are offered unto me (17) even as he 
“doth over those which are offered unto Osiris. I have 
“stablished for you your offerings, and ye have obtained 
“the mastery over your oblations, even as Ra hath com- 
“manded me [to do]. (18) Iam the god Mehiu and I 
“am his heir upon the earth, and I have made [my] 
“path. O ye Hetepu gods, grant ye that I may enter 
“into the Tuat, and let me make a way (19) into the 


a 
a. — 


ag 


Chap. clxxx. 29] OF COMING FORTH BY DAY 613 


“beautiful Amentet. I have stablished the sceptre of 
“the god Sah and the nemmes crown for the god whose 
“name is hidden. Look ye, then, (20) O Hetepu gods, 
“and ye gods who are the guides of the Tuat, and grant 
“that I may receive my glorious might, and let me rise 
“like a luminary (21) above his hidden place, and 
“deliver ye me from the deadly stakes of those who 
“are chained thereunto. Chain ye me not unto your 
(22) deadly stakes, and give ye me not over to the 
“habitation of the fiends who slay.” 

“Tam the heir of Osiris, and I have received his 
“nemmes crown in the Tuat; (23) look ye upon me, then, 
“‘and let me rise like a luminary who hath come forth 
“from your members; and let me come into being like 
“my divine father (24) who is worshipped. Look ye 
“upon me, then, and rejoice ye in me, and grant that I 
“may rise up, (25) and that I may come into being like 
“him whose transformations were destroyed. Open ye 
“a way unto my divine soul, O ye who stand upon your 
“places. Grant ye that (26).I may rest in the beauti- 
“ful Amentet, and decree ye for me a seat in front of 
“you. Open ye out to me your paths, and draw back 
“for me the bolts of your doors. (27) Behold, O Ra, 
“as thou art the guide of this earth, so let the djyvine 
“souls be [my] guides, and let [me] follow after the 
“gods. Iam he who guardeth (28) his own pylon, and 
“TT am| led along by those who lead; I am he who 
‘‘keepeth ward over his doors, and who setteth the gods 
“in their places; (29) I am he who dwelleth upon his 


614 OF COMING FORTH BY DAY [Chap. clxxx. 30 


“standard within the Tuat. I am the god Henbi, the 
“ouardian of the lands (?) of the gods; I am the 
“houndaries of the Tuat, (30) I am the god Hetepi 
“in Aukert. My offerings have been made in Amentet 
“by the divine souls who dwell in the gods, (31) I 
‘Cam the god Meh-a-nuti-Ra. JI am the hidden Bennu 
“bird; I enter in [as] he resteth in the Tuat, and [I] 
“come forth [as he] resteth (82) in the Tuat. I am 
“the lord of the celestial abodes and I journey through 
“the night sky after Ra. My offerings are in heaven 
“in the Field of (83) Ra, and my sepulchral meals are 
“on earth in the Field of Aaru. I travel through the 
“Tuat like the beings [who are with] Ra, and I weigh 
‘¢(34) words like the god Thoth. I stretch myself at 
‘“‘my desire, I run forward with my strides in my spiri- 
“tual form of (35) hidden qualities, and my transforma- 
‘tions are those of the double god Horus-Set. I am 
“the president of the food of the gods of the Tuat, and 
“T give the sepulchral offerings (86) of the Khus. I 
“am the god of the Mighty Heart who smiteth his 
. “enemies. Hail, ye gods and Khus, the ancestors (?) 
“of Ra, who follow after (87) the divine Soul which he 
“hath, lead ye me along as ye lead [him] along, and do 
‘ye, who are the guides of Ra and who are leaders (38) 
“dwelling in the upper heaven, [guide me,] for I am 
“like unto the divine and holy Soul who is in Amentet,” 


Ch, clxxxi.6] OF ENTERING TO THE BLESSED 615 


CHAPTER CLXXXI. 


[From the Papyrus of Qenna (see Leemans, Papyrus Egyptien, 
sea pel LG) ea 


Vignette: The deceased kneeling in adoration before three 

gods who are seated before a door; behind are a lion-headed 

and a vulture-headed god, each of whom has a serpent above 
his head. 


Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF ENTERING IN TO THE 
DIVINE SOVEREIGN CHIEFS OF OSIRIS, AND TO THE 
GODS WHO ARE GUIDES IN THE TUAT, (2) AND TO 
THOSE WHO KEEP WARD OVER THEIR GATES, AND TO 
THOSE WHO ARE HERALDS OF THEIR HALLS, (3) AND 
TO THOSE WHO ARE THE PORTERS OF THE DOORS AND 
PYLONS OF AMENTET; AND OF MAKING THE TRANS- 
FORMATIONS LIKE (4) A LIVING SOUL; AND OF PRAISING 
OSIRIS AND OF BECOMING THE PRINCE OF THE DIVINE 
SOVEREIGN CHIEFS. The Osiris Qenna, triumphant, 
saith :—- 

“Homage to thee, O governor (5) of Amentet, Un- 
“nefer, lord of Ta-tchesert, (6) O thou who art diademed 


616 OF ENTERING TO THE BLESSED _ [Ch. clxxxi. 7 


“like Ra, verily I come to see thee and to rejoice (7) at 
“thy beauties. His disk is thy disk; his rays of light 
“are thy rays (8) of light; his Ureret crown is thy 
“ Uyeret crown; his majesty is thy majesty; his risings 
“are thy (9) risings; his beauties are thy beauties; the 
“terror which he inspireth is the terror which thou in- 
“spirest ; his odour (10) is thy odour; his hall is thy 
“hall, his seat is thy seat; his throne is thy throne ; 
(11) his heir is thy heir; his ornaments are thy orna- 
“ments; (12) his decree is thy decree; his hidden 
“lace is thy hidden place; his things are thy things; 
(13) his knowledge (or powers) is thy knowledge ; the 
“attributes of greatness which are his are thine; the 
“power (14) which protecteth him protecteth thee ;1 he 
“dieth not and thou diest not; he is not triumphed 
‘over (15) by his enemies, and thou art not triumphed 
“over by thine enemies ; no evil thing whatsoever hath 
“happened (16) unto him, and no evil thing whatsoever 
“shall happen unto thee for ever and for ever.” 

(17) “Homage to thee, O Osiris, son of Nut, lord of 
“the two horns, whose Atef crown is exalted, may the 
“Ureret crown be given unto him, along with sove- 
“reignty before the company of the gods. (18) May 
“the god Temu make terror of him to exist in the 
“hearts of men, and women, (19) and gods, and Khus, 
“and the dead. May dominion be given unto him in 
“Annu (Heliopolis) ; (20) may he be mighty of trans- 
“formations in Tattu (Mendes); may he be the lord 


1 Reading maket-f maket-k. 


Ch. clxxxi. 23 and 1-5] OF ENTERING TO THE BLESSED 617 


“oreatly feared in the Aati; may he be mighty in 
“ (21) victory in Re-stau; may he be the lord who is 
‘remembered with gladness in the Great House; may 
“he have manifold (22) risings like a luminary in Abtu 
(Abydos) ; may triumph be given unto him in the 
“presence of the company of the gods; (23) may he 
“gain the victory over the mighty Powers; may the 
“fear of him be made to go [throughout] the earth ; 
“and may (1) the princes stand up! upon their sta- 
“tions before the sovereign of the gods of the Tuat, 
(2) the mighty Form of heaven, the Prince of the 
“living ones, the King of those who are therein, and 
“the Glorifier of thousands in Kher-iha. The denizens 
‘“‘of heaven rejoice in him who is the (3) lord of the 
“chosen offerings in the mansions above; a meat 
‘offering is made unto him in the city Het-ka-Ptah 
“ (Memphis); and the ‘things of the night’ are pre- 
“pared for him in Sekhem (Letopolis). Behold, O 
“mighty god, thou great one of (4) two-fold strength, 
“thy son Horus avengeth thee. He doeth away with 
“every evil thing whatsoever that belongeth to thee, 
“he bindeth up in order for thee thy person, he 
“‘oathereth together for thee thy members, he col- 
“Jecteth for thee thy bones, he bringeth to thee thy 
SS aNGe a ee ae (5) ..; thou art raised up, then, O 
“Osiris, I have given unto thee thy hand, and I make 
“thee to stand up alive for ever and ever. The god 


1 What follows here is from the text given by Naville (op. cit., 
Bd. I. Bl. 206), 


618 OF ENTERING TO THE BLESSED _ [Ch. clxxxi. 


“Seb directeth (?) thy mouth, the great company of the 
“ gods protecteth thee, .... (6)... ., and they ac- 
‘company thee unto the door of the gate of the Tuat. 
“Thy mother Nut placeth her hands behind thee, she 
‘‘oiveth thee strength, and she reneweth the power 
“which protecteth thee. (7)..... births, thy two 
‘sisters Isis and Nephthys come unto thee, and they 
“unite thee unto life, and strength, and health, and 
“thy heart rejoiceth before them; (8)..... they 
“ , . in thee through love of thee, and they load thy 
“hands for thee with things of all kinds. All the gods 
“present unto thee provisions, and behold, (9) they 
“praise thee for ever. Happy art thou, O Osiris, for 
“thou art crowned, and art endowed with strength, and 
“art glorious; and thine attributes are stablished for 
“thee. Thy face is like that of Anpu, (10) Ra re- 
“joiceth in thee, and he maketh himself to be a brother 
“to thy beautiful person. Thou sittest upon thy throne, 
“the god Seb maketh a libation for thee, and that which 
“thou wishest to receive is in thy hands in Amentet. 
(11) Thou sailest over the celestial regions each day, 
“thy mother Nut maketh thee to go forth on thy way, 
“and thou settest in life in Amentet in the boat of Ra 
“each day, along with (12) Horus who loveth thee. 
“The protecting strength of Ra guardeth thee, the 
“words of might of Thoth are behind thee, and Isis 
“maketh strength to follow after thy person.” (18) 

‘“T have come to thee, O lord of Ta-tchesert, Osiris, 
“Governor of those who are in Amentet, Un-nefer, 


Ch, clxxxi. 25] OF ENTERING TO THE BLESSED 619 


“whose twofold existence is for ever and for ever. My 
“heart is right and true, my hands are pure, I have 
“brought (14) things unto their divine lord, and offer- 
‘ings unto the god who made them. I have come and 
“T have advanced to your cities. I have done that 
“which was good upon earth, I have slain thine enemies 
“for thee like sacrificial oxen (15). I have slaughtered 
“for thee thy adversaries, and I have made them to fall 
‘down [upon] their faces before thee. I am pure, even 
“as thou art pure; I have made pure for thee thy 
“festival; and have...... (16) upon thine altar 
“to thy soul, and to thy Form, and to the gods, and to 
“the goddesses who are in thy train.” 


RUBRIC: (24) If this chapter be known [by the deceased ] 
things of evil shall not gain the mastery over him, and he 
shall not be turned back from any of the doors of Amentet; 
but he shall (25) go in and come out, and cakes, and ale, and 
all beautiful things shall be given unto him in the presence of 
those who dwell in the Tuat. 


620 OF STABLISHING OSIRIS (Chap. cixxxii. 


CHAPTER CLXXXII. 


[From the Papyrus of Mut-hetep (Brit. Mus. No. 10,010, sheet 4). ] 


ae 


<_ 
—_— 
<— 


antl 
7 
jh / 


Vignette : The deceased lying upon a bier within a funeral 

chest or coffer; beneath the bier are three vases. At the foot 

stand Isis, Hapi, and Tuamautef, and at the head Nephthys, 

Mestha, and Qebhsennuf. In the upper and lower registers 

are a number of seated and standing man-headed and animal- 

headed deities who hold in their hands snakes, lizards, and 
knives. 


Chap, cixxxii, J OF STABLISHING OSIRIS 621 


Text: (1) Tue Book oF staBLisHinc Osiris 
FIRMLY, OF GIVING AIR TO THE SvTiLL-HEART, WHILST 
THOTH REPULSETH THE FOES OF Osiris, who cometh. 
there in his transformations, (2) and is protected, and 
made strong, and guarded in the underworld by the 
operation of the will of Thoth himself, and Shu setteth 
upon him each day. [Thoth saith :—] 

“Tam Thoth, the perfect scribe, (3) whose hands are 
“ure, the lord of the two horns, who maketh iniquity 
“Tto be destroyed], the scribe of right and truth, who 
“abominateth sin. Behold, he is the writing-reed of 
_ “the god Neb-er-tcher, the lord of laws, (4) who giveth 
“forth the speech of wisdom and understanding, whose 
“words have dominion over the two lands. I am 
“(Thoth], the lord of right and truth, who trieth the 
“rioht and the truth for the gods, the judge of words 
“Cin their essence, whose words triumph over violence. 
“T have scattered (5) the darkness, I have driven away 
“the whirlwind and the storm, and I have given the 
“pleasant breeze of the north wind unto Osiris Un- 
“nefer as he came forth from (6) the womb of her who 
“oave him birth. I have made Ra to set as Osiris, 
“and Osiris setteth as Ra setteth. I have made him 
“to enter into the hidden habitation to vivify the (7) 
“heart of the Still-Heart, the holy Soul, who dwelleth 
“in Amentet, and to shout cries of joy unto the Still- 
“Heart, Un-nefer, the son of Nut.” (8) 

“Tam Thoth, the favoured one of Ra, the lord of 
“might, who bringeth to a prosperous end that which 


622 OF STABLISHING OSIRIS [Chap. clxxxii. 9 


“he doeth, the mighty one of enchantments who is in 
“the boat of millions of years, the lord of laws, the 
“subduer of the two lands, (9) whose words of might 
“gave strength to her that gave him birth, whose word 
“doeth away with opposition and fighting, and who 
“»erformeth the will of Ra in his shrine.” 

“T am Thoth, who made Osiris to triumph (10) over 
‘“‘ his enemies.” 

“T am Thoth who issueth the decree at dawn, whose 
“sioht followeth on again after [his] overthrow at his 
“season, the guide of heaven, and earth, and the under- 
“world, (11) and the creator of the life of [all] nations 
‘‘and peoples. I gave air unto him that was in the 
“hidden place by means of the might of the magical 
“words of my utterance, and Osiris triumphed over his 
‘enemies. (12) I came unto thee, O lord of Ta-tcheser, 
“Osiris, Bull of Ament, and thou wert strengthened for 
“ever. I set everlastingness as a protection for thy 
“members, and I came [unto thee] having protection 
(13) in my hand, and I guarded [thee] with strength 
“during the course of each and every day ; protection 
“and life were behind this god, protection and life 
“were behind this god, and his ka was glorified with 
“power.” 

“The king of the Tuat, (14) the prince of Amentet, 
“the victorious conqueror of heaven, hath the Atef 
“crown firmly stablished [upon him], he is diademed 
“with the white crown, and he graspeth the crook and 
“the whip; unto him, the great one of souls, the 


Chap, clxxxii, 22] OF STABLISHING OSIRIS 623 


“mighty one of (15) the Ureret crown, every god is 
_ “gathered together, and love for him who is Un- 
“nefer, and whose existence is for everlasting and all 
“eternity, goeth through their bodies.” 

“Homage to thee, O Governor of those who are in 
“ Amenti, (16) who maketh mortals to be born again, 
“who renewest thy youth, thou comest who dwellest in 
“thy season, and who art more beautiful than... .. 
“thy son Horus (17) hath avenged thee ; the rank (or 
“dignity) of Tem hath been conferred upon thee, O 
“Un-nefer. Thou art raised up, O Bull of Amentet, 
“thou art stablished, yea stablished in the body of Nut, 
“who uniteth herself (18) unto thee, and who cometh 
“forth with thee. Thy heart is stablished upon that 
‘““which supporteth it, and thy breast is as it was 
“formerly ; thy nose is firmly fixed with life and 
“power, thou livest, and thou art renewed, and thou 
“makest thyself (19) young like Ra each and every 
“day. Mighty, mighty is Osiris in victory, and he 
“is firmly stablished with life.” 

“Tam Thoth, and I have pacified Horus, and I have 
“quieted the two (20) divine Combatants in their season 
“of storm. I have come and I have washed the Ruddy 
“one, I have quieted the Stormy one, and I have 
“filled (?) him with all manner of evil things.” (21) 

“T am Thoth, and I have made the ‘things of the 
“night’ in Sekhem (Letopolis).” 

“Tam Thoth, and I have come daily into the cities 
“of Pe and Tepu. I have led (22) along the offerings 


624 OF STABLISHING OSIRIS — [Chap. clxxxii. 23 


“and oblations, I have given cakes with lavish hand to 
“the Khus, I have protected the (23) shoulder of Osiris, 
“T have embalmed him, I have made sweet his odour, 
“even as is that of the beautiful god.” 

“Tam Thoth, and I have come each day into the city 
‘of (24) Kher-aha. I have tied the cordage and I have 
“set in good order the Makhent boat, and I have 
“brought [it] [from] the East [to] the West. I am 
“more exalted upon my standard (25) than any god in 
“my name of ‘He whose face is exalted.’ I have 
“opened fair things in my name of Ap-uat (i.e., Opener 
“of the road), and I have (26) ascribed praise and done 
“homage unto Osiris Un-nefer, whose existence is for 
“ever and for ever.” 


CHAPTER CLXXXIIL 
[From the Papyrus of Hu-nefer (Brit. Mus., No. 9901, sheet 3). ] 


Vignette: (a) The deceased and his wife standing with 
hands raised in adoration; (6) Thoth, ibis-headed, standing 
upright and presenting symbols of “strength” and “life.” 


Text: (1) Tue Osiris HU-NEFER, THE OVERSEER 
OF THE PALACE OF THE LORD OF THE TWO LANDS, 
TRIUMPHANT, PRAISETH OSIRIS AND ACCLAIMETH HIM, 
AND DOETH HOMAGE UNTO UN-NEFER, AND BOWETH 


ae 


Chap. clxxxiii, 16] HYMN TO OSIRIS 625 


TO THE GROUND BEFORE THE LORD OF TA-TCHESERT, 
AND EXALTETH THOSE WHO ARE UPON HIS SAND, (2) 
saying :— 

“T have come unto thee, (3) O son of Nut, Osiris, 
“Prince of everlastingness; I am in (4) the following 
“of the god Thoth, and I have rejoiced (5) at every 
“thing which he hath 
“done for thee. He 
“hath brought unto 
“thee sweet air (6) for 
“thy nose; and life and 
“strength to thy beau- 
“tiful face; and the 
“north wind which (7) 
“cometh forth from 
“Tem for thy nostrils, 
“O lord of (8) Ta-tche- 
“sert. He hath made 
“the god Shu to shine 
“upon thy body; (9) he hath illumined thy path with 
“rays of splendour; he hath destroyed (10) for thee 
Tall] the evil defects which belong to thy members by 
‘(11) the magical power of the words of his utterance. 
“He hath made the two Horus brethren to be at peace 
“for thee; he hath destroyed the storm-wind and the 
“hurricane; he hath made the two Combatants to be 
“oracious unto thee and the two lands to be (12) at 
‘‘neace before thee; he hath put away the wrath which 


“was in their hearts, and each hath become reconciled 
VOL. III. H 


626 HYMN TO OSIRIS Chap. clxxxiii. 13 


“unto his brother. Thy son Horus is triumphant in 
“the presence (13) of the whole company of the gods, 
“the sovereignty over the world hath been given unto 
“him, and his dominion is in the uttermost parts of 
“the earth. The throne of.the god Seb hath been 
“adjudged unto him, (14) along with the rank which 
“hath been founded by the god Temu, and which hath 
“been stablished by decrees in the Chamber of books, 
“and hath been inscribed upon an iron tablet accord- 
“ing to the command (15) of thy father Ptah-Tanen, 
“{when he sat upon] the great throne. He hath set 
“his brother upon that which the god Shu beareth up, 
“to stretch out the waters over the mountains, and to 
“make to spring up (16) that which groweth upon the 
“hills, and the grain (?) which shooteth upon the earth, 
“and he giveth increase by water and by land. Gods 
“celestial and gods terrestrial transfer themselves to 
“the service of thy son Horus, (17) and they follow 
“him into his hall, [where] a decree is passed that he 
“shall be lord over them, and they perform it straight- 
“way.” 

“Thy heart rejoiceth, O lord of the gods, thy heart 
“rejoiceth (18) greatly ; Egypt and the Red Land are 
“at peace, and they serve humbly under thy sovereign 
“power. The temples are stablished upon their own 
“lands, cities and nomes (19) possess firmly the pro- 
‘““perty which they have in their names, and we will 
“make to thee the divine offerings which we are bound 
“to make, and offer sacrifices in thy name for ever. 


le 


Chap. clxxxiif! 31] HYMN TO OSIRIS 627 


“(20) Acclamations are made in thy name, libations 
“are poured out to thy ka, sepulchral meals [are 
“brought unto thee] by the khus who are (21) in 
“their following, and water is sprinkled upon the 
‘offerings (?) (22) upon both sides of the souls (23) 
“of the dead in this land; every (24) design which 
“hath been ordered for thee according to his (i.e., Ra’s) 
“commands in the beginning hath been perfected. (25) 
“Now, therefore, O son of Nut, thou art diademed as 
(26) Neb-er-tcher is diademed at his rising. Thou 
“livest, (27) thou art stablished, thou renewest thy 
“youth, and thou art true and perfect; thy father Ra 
“maketh strong thy members, and the company of the 
“oods make acclamations unto thee. The goddess Isis 
(28) is with thee and she never leaveth thee; [thou 
‘art| not overthrown by thine enemies. The lords of 
‘all lands praise thy beauties even as they praise Ra 
“when (29) he riseth at the beginning of each day. 
“Thou risest up like an exalted one upon thy standard, 
“thy beauties exalt the face [of man] and make long 
“fhis] stride. (30) I have given unto thee the sove- 
“reigonty of thy father Seb, and the goddess Mut, thy 
“mother, who gave birth to the gods, brought thee 
“forth as the (31) firstborn of five gods, and created 
“thy beauties and fashioned thy members. Thou art 
“stablished as king, the white crown is upon thy head, 
“and thou hast grasped in thy hands the crook and 
“the whip; whilst.thou wert in the womb, and hadst 
“not as yet come forth therefrom upon the earth, thou 


628 HYMN TO OSIRIS [Chap. elxxxiii. 32 


‘wert (32) crowned lord of the two lands, and the Atef 
“crown of Ra was upon thy brow. The gods come 
“unto thee bowing low to the ground, and they hold 
“thee in fear; they retreat and depart when they (33) 
“see thee with the terror of Ra, and the victory of thy 
“Majesty is in their hearts. Life is with thee, and 
“offerings of meat and drink (34) follow thee, and that 
‘which is thy due is offered up before thy face.” 

“Grant thou that I may follow in the train of thy 
“Majesty even as I did upon earth. Let my soul (35) 
“be called [into the presence], and let it be found by 
“the side of the lords of right and truth. I have come 
“into the City of God—the region [which existed] in 
“primeval time—with [my] soul, and with [my] double, 
“and with [my] khw to dwell in this land. (86) The 
‘“‘ood thereof is the lord of right and truth, he is the 
“lord of the tchefau food of the gods, and he is most 
“holy. His land draweth unto itself every [other] 
“Jand; the South cometh sailing down the river 
“thereto, and the North, (87) steered thither by 
“winds, cometh daily to make festival therein ac- 
“cording to the command of the God thereof, who is 
“the lord of peace therein. And doth he not say, 
“<The happiness thereof (38) is a care unto me’? The 
“ood who dwelleth therein worketh right and truth ; 
“unto him that doeth these things he giveth old age, 
‘and to him that followeth after them rank and honour, 
“and at length he attaineth unto (39) a happy funeral 
“and burial in Ta-tchesert,” 


Chap. clxxxiii. 44] HYMN TO OSIRIS 629 


“T have come unto thee, and my hands hold right 
“and truth, and my heart hath no crafty wickedness 
“therein. (40) I offer up before thee that which is 
“thy due, and I know that whereon thou livest. I 
“have not committed any sin in the land, and I have 
“defrauded no man of (41) that which is his.” 

“T am Thoth, the perfect scribe, whose hands are 
“pure. Iam the lord of purity, the destroyer of evil, 
“the scribe of right and 
“truth, and that which I 
“abominate is (42) sin. 
“Behold me, for I am 
“the writing reed of the 
“ood Neb-er-tcher, the 
“Jord of laws, who giveth 
“forth the word of wis- 
“dom and understanding, 
“and whose speech hath 
‘dominion over the two 
“Jands. Iam (43) Thoth, 
“the lord of right and 
“truth, who maketh the 
“feeble one to gain the 
“victory, and who aven- 
“oeth the wretched and 
“the oppressed on him 
“that wrongeth him. I have scattered the darkness ; 
“(44) I have driven away the storm, and I have 
“brought the wind to Un-nefer, the beautiful breeze 


630 OF BEING NIGH UNTO OSIRIS [Chap. clxxxiii. 45 


‘‘of the north wind, even as it came forth from the 
“womb (45) of his mother. I have caused him to 
“enter into the hidden abode to vivify the heart of 
“the Still-Heart, Un-nefer, the son of Nut, Horus, 
“triumphant.” 


CHAPTER CLXXXIY. 


[From the Papyrus of Uaa (see Naville, op. cit., Bd. I. Bl. 210). ] 


Vignette : The deceased standing upright before Osiris, who 
wears the Atef crown, and holds in his hands the whip and 
crook, emblems of sovereignty and dominion. 


Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF BEING NIGH UNTO 
Osrris.' [The Osiris Uaa, the overseer of the estates 
of Amen, triumphant, saith :—] 

' This Chapter contains about two short lines of text, of which 


only a few words haye come down to us in a single copy; to make 
any connected sense of them is impossible. 


Chap. clxxxv. 3] PRAISES OF OSIRIS 631 


CHAPTER CLXXXYV. 


[From the Papyrus of Sutimes (ed. Guieyesse and Lefébure, Paris, 
1877, Pl. 1).] 


0, Q00 COO e, 
y Si 


DW 


Vignette: Osiris at the head of Abtu, the great god, Prince 

of eternity and Governor of Amentet, enthroned within a 

shrine; he holds in his hands the whip and crook, emblems of 

sovereignty and dominion. Before the shrine, with hands 

raised in adoration, kneels the deceased, and on each side of 
it are two gods offering incense. 


Text: (3) THE GIVING OF PRAISES UNTO OsIRIS, 
AND OF PAYING HOMAGE UNTO THE LORD OF ETERNITY, 
AND PROPITIATING THE GOD IN HIS WILL, AND DE- 
CLARING THE RIGHT AND TRUTH, THE LORD OF WHICH 
IS UNKNOWN. The Osiris Sutimes, the libationer and 
president of the altar chamber in the Apts, the presi- 


632 PRAISES OF OSIRIS [ Chap, clxxxv 


dent of the scribes of the Temple of Amen, triumphant, 
saith :— 


“Homage to thee, O thou holy god, thou mighty 
‘“‘and beneficent being, thou Prince of eternity who 
‘“‘dwellest in thy abode in the Sektet boat, thou whose 
“yisings are manifold in the Atet boat, to thee are 
“praises rendered in heaven and upon earth. Peoples 
‘and nations exalt thee, and the majesty of the terror 
“of him is in the hearts of men, and khus, and the 
“dead. Thy Soul is in Tettet (Mendes) and the terror 
“of thee is in Suten-henen; thou settest the visible 
“emblems of thyself in Annu and the greatness of thy 
“transformations in the double place of purification. I 
“have come unto thee, and my heart hath right and 
“truth therein, and there is neither craft nor guile in 
“my breast ;-.grant thou that I may have my being 
“among the living, and that I may sail down and up 
“the river among those who are in thy following.” 


54k pee 


Chap, clxxxvi. ] THE FUNERAL MOUNTAIN 633 


CHAPTER CLXXXVI. 


[From the Papyrus of Ani (Brit. Mus. No. 10,470, sheet 37).] 


Vignette : (1) Ani and his wife before a table of offerings 
adoring the god. (2) “Seker Osiris, the lord of the hidden 
place, the great god, the lord of the underworld,” standing in a 
shrine. (3) The goddess Hathor, in the form of a hippopotamus, 
wearing upon her head a disk and horns; in her right hand she 
holds an unidentified object, and in her left the emblem of life. 
Before her are offerings, and behind her the cow Meh-urit, who 
may be identified with Hathor, looks forth from the funeral 
mountain, At the foot of the mountain is the tomb, and in 
the foreground grows a group of flowering plants, 


Text: “Hathor, lady of Amentet, mighty dweller in 
“the funeral mountain, lady of Ta-tchesert, daughter 
“(or eye) of Ra, dweller before him, beautiful of face in 


634 THE FUNERAL MOUNTAIN [Chap. clxxxvi. 


“the Boat of millions of years, the habitation (or seat) 
“of peace, creator of law in the boat (?) of the favoured 
RID Me oy Po OSes 

In the versions of this Chapter given by Naville (op. 
eit, Bd. I. Bl. 212) the deceased, sometimes accom- 
panied by his wife, is seen standing in adoration before 
the hippopotamus and cow goddesses. The texts which 
occupy the upper portions of the scenes are longer than 
that given in the papyrus of Ani, part of which is 
manifestly corrupt, and though all of them are more 
or less fragmentary we learn from them that this 
Chapter is entitled, ““The praise of Hathor, the mis- 
tress of Amentet, and the paying of homage to Meh- 
urit.” After reciting the titles of Hathor the deceased 
describes his devotion to the gods and the works which 
he did for them whilst he was upon earth, and having 
stated that he is innocent of offence, he entreats the 
goddess that he may have his existence among her 
divine followers, and that suitable offerings of all kinds 
may be made unto him in Amentet. 


Dy Fis 
UR) | 
wiv 


SAK 2 ; 
7 
R Q 
RNG 7 > 
+ SS i tf > 
= : Tr Leb Fe 1g fle A Tphietpe 
R Fry itor ¢, 
Ss = Dyin NTR: Rares. tne? COC Arar, 
aS Eee " P, Pry. Tier AEA 
H = 4 COD NE Sen mn 
3: = = tele NS aTWERD, 
Ri Le 7 cain 7 
weg te" ATU Ne En 
= — fetal ane, 
al 


UZ 


aT 
atl 
Theveyy ; =| 
DOS RETR CD 
en ttg riteh ¢ 


' Nate ' D Ny te 7 
OC UORAA OF UE Oe 


AHO 
Tat tn, 
typ OM pe 


1,4 
at 
iMag tree 


77h, 7 


77, 7 rane 
17 Wl fete rte le, Mere gly 
SSS COLT ras rita te. : 


n 


77 7,1) 
Tt n ete “ 


70 
Fer 


a TT 
= 7 7, 
= "Vo D> 
ONY, 
os WONG 
ree HN Oy 
LORI 
ONL 
tN 
LU) 
“ 
He 
rt 


a 
‘ Nf) > NS 
Pane Voi 


Meh-urt, or Hathor, and the tomb in the funeral mountain. 


The hippopotamus of Hathor. 


Seker-Osiris. 


Chap, clxxxviii, 2] OF ENTERING TO THE GODS 637 


CHAPTER CLXXXVII. 
[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 19).] 


Vignette : This Chapter is without a vignette in the Papyrus 
of Nu. 


Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF ENTERING IN UNTO 
THE COMPANY OF THE GODS. The overseer of the 
house of the overseer of the seal, Nu, triumphant, 
saith :— 

“Homage to you, O company of the gods of Ra, I 
“have come before you, I am in the following (2) of 
“Ra, T have made my way, and I have passed in among 


“you. Let not my hand be repulsed in whatsoever I 
“do this day.” 


CHAPTER CLXXXVIII. 
[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 19). ] 


Vignette : This Chapter is without a vignette in the Papyrus 
of Nu. 

Text: (1) [Tum Cuarrer or] THE GOING IN OF 

THE SOUL TO BUILD AN ABODE AND TO COME FORTH 

BY DAY IN HUMAN ForM. (2) The overseer of the 


638 OF COMING FORTH BY DAY [Chap. clxxxviii. 2 


house of the overseer of the seal, Nu, triumphant, the 


son of the overseer of the house, Amen-hetep, [trium- 
phant, | saith :— 

“TCome] in peace! Thou hast a khu. Enter [thou] 
“in peace into the divine Utchat! Behold, thou hast 
“a khu, together with a soul (ba) and a shade (khaibit), 
“to look (3) thereupon. May it behold [me], when I 
“am judged, in whatever place it may be, with my 
“attributes, and with my form, and with my faculties 
“(4) of mind, and with all my attributes ordered and 
“perfect, even as a soul which is provided [with all 
“things| and is divine. May I shine lke Ra in his 
“divine splendour (5) in the temple of ..... and 
‘may [my] soul and my shade come [to me] upon their 
“legs from the place where I am judged, and behold 
“me. (6) May I stand up, and sit down, and enter 
“into the house of his body, which, behold, hath 
“become one of the starry gods of Osiris (7) who 
“travel by day, and journey by night, and celebrate 
“the festivals.” 


———— 


Chap. clxxxix. 5] OF AVOIDING HUNGER 639 


CHAPTER CLXXXIX. 


[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 19).] 


. Vignette: This Chapter is without a vignette in the Papyrus 


of Nu. 


Text: (1) THe CHAPTER OF NOT LETTING A MAN 
PERFORM A JOURNEY (2) BEING HUNGRY (?), AND OF 
NOT LETTING HIM EAT FILTH. The overseer of the 
house of the overseer of the seal, Nu, triumphant, the 
son of the overseer of the house, Amen-hetep, trium- 
phant, saith :— 

“The things which are an abomination unto me, the 
“things which are an abomination unto me, I will not 
“eat, What I abominate (3) is filth, and I will not 
‘eat thereof [in the place of] the sepulchral cakes 
“Twhich are offered unto] the Kas. Let [me] not be 
“thrown down upon it, let it not light upon my body, 
“Jet it not enter into my fingers, (4) and let it not 
“join itself unto my toes. Thou shalt live, then, upon 
“that which the gods and the Khus decree for me in 
“this place and upon that which is brought unto thee 
“there. Let me live upon the (5) seven cakes which 
“shall be brought unto me, four cakes before Horus, 
“and three cakes before Thoth. The gods and the 
“Khus shall say unto me, ‘What manner of food 
“ wouldst thou have given unto thee?’ [And I reply, 


640 OF AVOIDING HUNGER [Chap. clxxxix. 6 


“Tet me eat (6) my food beneath the sycamore tree of 
“the goddess Hathor, and let my times be among the 
“divine beings who have alighted thereon. Let me 
‘have the power to order my own fields in Tattu and 
“(my own] growing crops (7) in Annu. Let me live 
‘upon bread made of white barley, and let my beer be 
“{made] from red grain; and may the persons of my 
“father and mother be given unto me as (8) guardians 
‘of my door and for the ordering of the divine terri- 
“tory. Let me be sound and strong, let me have a 
“Jarge room, let me make a way, let me have my seat 
“wherever I please, like a living soul, (9) and let me 
“never be kept in restraint by mine enemy.’ ” 

“That which is an abomination unto me is filth and 
“T will not eat thereof; let me never pass over filth 
“and offal in Annu, but let it depart from me. (10) I 
“am the Bull who ordereth his habitation. I fly like 
“the mighty one, I cackle like the smen goose, and I 
“alight upon the beautiful (11) sycamore which standeth 
“in the Lake of Akeb. I come forth and I alight upon 
“it; he who alighteth there in the form of the great 
“god shall not be driven away therefrom. The (12) 
“things which I abominate I will not eat; the things 
“which I abominate, the things which I abominate are 
“filth and offal, and I will not eat thereof. The things 
“which are an abomination unto my ka are filth and 
“offal ; they shall never enter into my body, (13) they 
“shall never come into my hands, and I will never 
“tread upon them with my sandals. O send ye not 


Chap, clxxxix. 21] OF AVOIDING HUNGER 641 


“forth against me foul water, harm ye not me (14) 
“with the rod, give ye not unto [me]...... , snatch 
““ye me not away from the edge of your deep cisterns, 
“and let me not depart from you being (15) overthrown. 
“The divine Aukhemu beings of the god Pen-heseb (?) 
“shall say [unto me], ‘Upon what wilt thou live in 
“this land whither thou art going, and wherein thou 
“wouldst be glorious?’ [And I reply], ‘I will live 
“upon (16) the cakes [made] of black grain, and upon 
“ale [made] of white grain, and upon four cakes in 
“Sekhet Hetep, which is more than [the food] of any 
“(or every) god. Moreover, I have four loaves of bread 
“during the course (17) of each and every day, besides 
‘‘four loaves in Annu, which is more than [the food] of 
“any (or every) god.’ And the divine Awkhemuw beings 
“of the god Pen-heseb (?) shall say [unto me], ‘ What 
“hast thou brought to eat (18) in that holy furrow?’ 
‘‘on that day when I receive my offerings with dunti 
“ynouent. [And I reply], ‘I will not eat thereof, it 
“shall not come into (19) my hands, and I will not 
“tread thereon with my sandals.’ And the divine 
“ dukhemw beings of the god Pen-heseb (?) shall say 
“unto me, ‘Upon what wilt thou live (20) in this land 
“whither thou art going, and wherein thou wouldst be 
“olorious?’ [And I reply], ‘I will live upon the seven 
“cakes which shall be brought, four in the Temple of 
“ Horus, and three in the Temple of Thoth. (21) And 
“the divine Aukhemu beings of the god Pen-heseb (?) 
“shall say [unto me], ‘Who, then, shall bring them 
VOL. III. I 


642 OF AVOIDING HUNGER (Chap. clxxxix. 22 


“unto thee?’ [And I reply], ‘The divine associate of 
“the temples of the Urhetchati goddesses of Annu? 
“TAnd they say], (22) ‘Where wilt thou eat them?’ 
“TAnd I reply], ‘Beneath the beams of the beautiful 
“ark to which hymns are sung as it is borne along; 
“thither shall I be taken.’ And the divine Auwkhemu 
“beings of the god Pen-heseb (?) shall say [unto me], 
‘«(23) ‘Wouldst thou live, then, upon the things [which 
“belong to] another every day?’ And I reply, ‘I will 
“myself plough the fields of [my] estate in Sekhet- 
“Aarru.’ And the divine Aukhemu beings (24) of the 
‘god Pen-heseb shall say [unto me], ‘Who will protect 
“them for thee?’ And I reply, ‘The two divine 
“daughters of the divine king of the North, besides 
“those who belong to them’ (?). [And the divine Awk- 
‘“hemu beings of the god Pen-heseb(?) shall say unto 
“me,| ‘Who will plough (25) them for thee?’ [And 
“T reply], ‘The divine chiefs who dwell among the 
‘‘oods of heaven and the gods of earth. The treading 
“down [of the earth] shall be done for me by the cow- 
“goddess Hapiu who dwelleth in the city of Sau, (26) 
‘“‘and the harvest shall be reaped for me by Suti, the _ 
“lord of heaven and of earth’ Hail, ye who tum 
“back (?) the blossoms upon yourselves, ye whose 
“transgressions are done away with, whose faces are 
“holy, (27) behold, I am with the divine beings of Set 
“at the mountain of Bakhau, and I sit down along 
“with the spiritual bodies who are perfect (28) on the 
“side of the Lake of Osiris to rejoice (?) [my] heart. 


Chap. exe.5] OF MAKING PERFECT THE SPIRIT 643 


‘Shall not | make the overseer of the house of the 
“overseer of the seal, Nu, triumphant, to know 
Nite?” 


CHAPTER CXC: 
[From the Papyrus of Nu (Brit. Mus. No. 10,477, sheet 16).] 


Vignette: This Chapter is without a vignette in the Papyrus 
of Nu. 


Text: (1) THe Book OF MAKING PERFECT THE 
Kyu wWitHin RA, OF MAKING HIM TO GAIN THE 
MASTERY BEFORE TEM, OF MAGNIFYING HIM BEFORE 
OSIRIS, OF MAKING HIM (2) TO BE POWERFUL BEFORE 
THE GOVERNOR OF AMENTET, AND OF CAUSING HIM 
TO BE MIGHTY BEFORE THE COMPANY OF THE GODS. 


RUBRIC: This book shall be recited on the [first] day of 
the month, on the festival of the six, on the festival of Uak, on 
the festival of Thoth, (3) on the birthday of Osiris, on the 
festival of Sekri, and on the festival of the night of Haker. [It 
will enable a man to pass through] the hidden places of the 
Tuat, and to penetrate the secret habitations of Neter-khert, 
to break through (4) mountains, and to open up a way through 
the secret valleys which are unknown. This chapter shall 
preserve (07 embalm) the khu, it shall make broad his steps, 
it shall give him [power to] walk, it shall destroy the (5) deaf- 


1 This Chapter may be merely the Rubric of the preceding 
Chapter in the Papyrus of Nu to which a title has been given; it 
is only printed here for the sake of convenience. 


644 OF MAKING PERFECT THE SPIRIT  [Chap. exe. 9 


ness of his face, and it shall enable him to make a way for his 
face with the god. When thou recitest [this chapter] thou 
shalt not let any man whatsoever see thee except him that is 
indeed dear to thy heart and the priest who readeth the service 
(Kher heb), (6) thou shalt not let any other person see [thee], 
and no servant shall come outside [the chamber wherein thou 
art]. Thou shalt recite [this chapter] inside a chamber [lined] 
with cloth decorated (literally, shot) with stars throughout. 
The soul of every khu (i.e., the deceased) for (7) whom this 
book hath been recited shall come forth among the living, he 
himself shall come forth by day, and he shall gain the mastery 
among the gods and shall not be (8) repulsed by them. And 
these gods shall revolve round about him, and they shall 
acknowledge (literally, recognize) him, and indeed he shall be 
as the divine one among them. And he shall make thee to 
know the transformations which shall come to him in the light. 
(9) This book is indeed a very great mystery; and thou shalt 
never allow those who dwell in the papyrus swamps of the 
Delta (7.¢., ignorant folk) or any person whatsoever to see it. 


We 


645 


ede ds) NG BBS 


THE BOOK OF THE DEAD OF NESI- 
KHONSU, A PRIESTESS OF AMEN, 


ABOUT B.C. 1000.1 


“This holy god, the lord of all the gods, Amen-Ra, 
“the lord of the throne of the two lands, the governor 
“of Apt; the holy soul who came into being in the 
“beginning; the great god who liveth by (or upon) 
“Maat; the first divine matter which gave birth unto 
“subsequent divine matter !* the being through whom 
‘“‘every [other] god hath existence; the One One who 
“hath made everything which hath come into exist- 
“ence since primeval times when the world was created ; 
“the being whose births are hidden, whose evolutions 
“are manifold, and whose growths are unknown; the 
“holy Form, beloved, terrible, and mighty in his 
‘“isings; the lord of wealth, the power, Khepera 
“who createth every evolution of his existence, ex- 

1 A hieroglyphic transcript of the hieratic text of this remark- 
able document, together with a French translation, has been pub- 
lished by Maspero in Les Moiies Royales de Déir-el-bahart?, p. 594 f. 


2 Or, ‘‘the primeval paut which gave birth unto the [other] two 
pautti.” 


646 PAPYRUS OF NESI-KHONSU 


“eept whom at the beginning none other existed ; 
‘who at the dawn in the primeval time was Atennu, 
“the prince of rays and beams of light; who having 
‘‘made himself [to be seen, caused] all men to live ; 
“who saileth over the celestial regions and faileth not, 
‘for at dawn on the morrow his ordinances are made 
“permanent ; who though an old man shineth in the 
“form of one that is young, and having brought (or 
“Jed) the uttermost parts of eternity goeth round about 
“the celestial regions and journeyeth through the Tuat 
‘to illumine the two lands which he hath created ; the 
“God who acteth as God, who moulded himself, who 
“made the heavens and the earth by his will (or heart); 
“the greatest of the great, the mightiest of the mighty, 
“the prince who is mightier than the gods, the young 
“Bull with sharp horns, the protector of the two lands 
“in his mighty name of ‘The everlasting one who 
“cometh and hath his might, who bringeth the re- 
“‘motest limit of’ eternity,’ the god-prince who hath 
“been prince from the time that he came into being, 
“the conqueror of the two lands by reason of his 
“might, the terrible one of the double divine face, 
“the divine aged one, the divine form who dwelleth 
“in the forms of all the gods, the Lion-god with awe- 
“some eye, the sovereign who casteth forth the two 
“Hyes, the lord of flame [which goeth] against his 
“enemies ; the god Nu, the prince who advanceth at 
“his hour to vivify that which cometh forth upon his 
“potter's wheel, the disk of the Moon-god who openeth 


PAPYRUS OF NESI-KHONSU 647 


“a way both in heaven and upon earth for the beau- 
“tiful form ; the beneficent (or operative) god, who is 
“untiring, and who is vigorous of heart both in rising 
“and in setting, from whose divine eyes come forth 
“men and women ; at whose utterance the gods come 
“into being, and food is created, and tchefaw food is 
‘‘made, and all things which are come into being; the 
‘‘traverser of eternity, the old man who maketh himself 
“young [again], with myriads of pairs of eyes and 
‘““numberless pairs of ears, whose light is the guide 
“of the god of millions of years; the lord of life, who 
‘“oiveth unto whom he pleaseth the circuit of the earth 
“along with the seat of his divine face, who setteth 
“out upon his journey and suffereth no mishap by the 
“way, whose work none can destroy ; the lord of delight, 
‘‘whose name is sweet and beloved, at dawn mankind 
“make supplication unto him the Mighty one of victory, 
“the Mighty one of twofold strength, the Possessor of 
“fear, the young Bull who maketh an end of the 
“hostile ones, the Mighty one who doeth battle with 
“his foes, through whose divine plans the earth came 
“into being; the Soul who giveth light from his two 
“ Utchats (Hyes); the god Baiti who created the divine 
“transformations ; the holy one who is unknown; the 
“kine who maketh kings to rule, and who girdeth up 
“the earth in its courses, and to whose souls the gods 
‘and the goddesses pay homage by reason of the might 
‘of his terror; since he hath gone before that which 
“followeth endureth ; the creator of the world by his 


648 PAPYRUS OF NESI-KHONSU 


“secret counsels; the god Khepera who is unknown 
“and who is more hidden than the [other] gods, whose 
‘substitute is the divine Disk; the unknown one who 
“hideth himself from that which cometh forth from 
“him; he is the flame which sendeth forth rays of 
“light with mighty splendour, but though he can be 
“seen in form and observation can be made of him at 
‘his appearance yet he cannot be understood, and at 
“dawn mankind make supplication unto him; his 
“risings are of crystal among the company of the 
“oods, and he is the beloved object of every god; 
“the god Nu cometh forward with the north wind in 
“this god who is hidden; who maketh decrees for 
“millions of double millions of years, whose ordinances 
“are fixed and are not destroyed, whose utterances are 
“oracious, and whose statutes fail not in his appointed 
“time ; who giveth duration of life and doubleth the 
“years of those unto whom he hath a favour; who 
“oraciously protecteth him whom he hath set in his 
“heart; who hath formed eternity and everlastingness, 
“the king of the South and of the North, Amen-Ra, 
“the king of the gods, the lord of heaven and of earth, 
“and of the deep, and of the two mountains, in whose 
“form the earth began to exist, he the mighty one, who 
‘is more distinguished than all the gods of the first and 
“foremost company.” 

Amen-Ra, the king of the gods, the great god, the 
beginning of what hath come into being, hath sent 
forth his great and holy edict for the deification of 


PAPYRUS OF NESI-KHONSU 649 


Nesi-Khonsu, the daughter of Ta-hennu-Tehuti, both 
in Amentet and in Neter-khert ..... and he 
saith :— 

“T deify Nesi-Khonsu, the daughter of Ta-hennu- 
“Tehuti in Amentet, and I deify her in Neter-khert ; 
“T have granted that she shall receive water in Amen- 
“tet and funeral offerings in Neter-khert. I deify her 
“soul and her body in Neter-khert, and I will not let 
“her soul be destroyed therein; nay, I deify her soul 
“in Neter-khert, [and I make it] like unto that of 
“every god and of every goddess who have been deified 
“therein, and like unto that of everything whatsoever 
“which hath been deified in Neter khert. I have 
‘“oranted that every god, and every goddess, and 
“every divine being, and every thing which hath been 
“deified shall receive her in Neter-khert ; and I have 
“oranted that all her kinsfolk (?) shall receive her 
“therein with a gracious reception; and I have 
“oranted that every good thing, which cometh into 
“being with a man when he assumeth this form, 
‘“‘whether he be carried off into the underworld, or 
‘whether he become deified, or whether every good 
“thing be wrought for him where he is, or whether he 
“be made to receive water and offerings, or whether he be 
“made to receive his cakes from those which those who 
“have been deified receive, or whether he be made to 
“yeceive his divine offerings from those which those 
‘““who have been deified receive, shall be done for her 
“so that it shall be with her.” ; 


650 PAPYRUS OF NESI-KHONSU 


Amen-Ra, the king of the gods, the great god, the 
prince of that which hath come into being from the 
beginning, saith :— 

“T cause Nesi-Khonsu, the daughter of Ta-hen- 
“Tehuti-a, to make every kind of food and every kind 
“of drink which every god and every goddess who 
“have been deified in the underworld make; and I 
“cause her to make every good thing which is with 
“every god and every goddess who have been deified 
‘in the underworld; and by means thereof I have 
‘delivered my servant Pa-netchem from every evil 
“thing, and I will not let any of the calamities which 
“occur in the underworld fall upon Nesi-Khonsu to do 
“her harm; and I grant that her soul may come forth, 
“and that it may enter in according to its desire and 
“never be repulsed.” 

Amen-Ra, the king of the gods, the great god, the 
prince of that which hath come into being from the 
beginning, saith :— 

“T have gone round (7.e., I have examined) the heart 
“of Nesi-Khonsu, the daughter of Ta-hen-Tehuti-a, 
“and she hath done no evil thing against Pa-netchem, 
“the son of Auset-em-khebit. I have carefully exam- 
“ined her heart, and I have not let her attack his life, 
“and I have not allowed her to attack his life through 
“other folk. I have carefully examined her heart, and 
“T have not let her do any evil thing unto him such as 
‘is done against a living man. I have carefully ex- 
‘amined her heart, and I have not allowed her to do 


PAPYRUS OF NESI-KHONSU 651 


“by means of other folk any of the evil things which 
“fare done against a living man.” 

Amen-Ra, the king of the gods, the great god, the 
prince of that which hath come into being from the 
beginning, saith :— 

“T have caused her not to seek to do any evil thing 
“which would cause death unto Pa-netchem, the son 
“of Auset-em-khebit. I have carefully examined her 
“heart and she hath done no evil thing unto him in 
“particular, nor any evil thing which could harm him 
“in general ; she hath not worked against him by 
“means of any god or any goddess who has been 
“deified ; nor by means of any male khu or of any 
“female khw who has been deified ; and she hath not 
“worked against him by means of any kind of beings 
‘‘whatsoever who work schemes and plans so that 
“beings of every kind may be obedient unto their 
“words. I have carefully examined her heart and 
“Tsee] that she hath sought that which was good for 
‘him whilst he was upon earth; and I have caused 
“her to seek in every way to give him a long life upon 
“earth, and a life of health, and soundness, and power, 
“and strength, and might; and I have caused her in 
“every way to procure for him happiness wherever the 
‘sound of his words was heard. I have caused her to 
‘seek neither harm for him, nor anything which could 
“inflict an injury upon man, nor anything which could 
“cause evil to Pa-netchem, the son of Auset-em-khebit. 
“‘T have caused her not to seek any evil thing, or any 


652 PAPYRUS OF NESI-KHONSU 


“noxious thing which would induce death, or any 
“harmful thing like unto those things which make 
“the heart of man to tremble, or those which do 
“harm unto the men and women who were beloved 
“by Pa-netchem, nor unto him by making his heart 
“terrified at them by means of the evil words which 
“have been directed against them (the men and women). 
“T have caused all that concerneth the heart and soul 
“of Nesi-Khonsu to be in good case, that is to say, her 
“heart hath not been driven away from her soul; her 
“soul hath not been driven away from her heart; her 
“heart hath not been driven away from herself; Nesi- 
‘“ Khonsu herself hath not been in any way driven back 
“with the repulse with which a being in her form— 
“that is to say a being who hath been deified in the 
“underworld, whatever its nature may be—is some- 
“times repulsed; and no evil thing whatsoever, such 
“as may be done unto the human being who is in a 
“state like unto hers, hath been done unto her. Nay, 
“but [I have given] all that could delight Nesi-Khonsu, 
“namely, that Pa-netchem might enjoy a very long life 
“along with might, and strength, and power; that his 
“life might not be cut short; that no evil thing of 
“any kind whatsoever, and none of the things which 
“do harm unto a man and strike terror into his heart 
“might come nigh him, or his wives, or his children, 
“or his brethren, or Ataui, or Nesta-neb-asher, or 
‘“Masahairtha, or Tchaui-nefer, the children of Nesi- 
“Khonsu, or the brethren of Nesi-Khonsu. And I 


PAPYRUS OF NESI-KHONSU 653 


“have caused that everything which would be of 
“advantage to Pa-netchem, and all that would be of 
“benefit to him in any way whatsoever and which 
“could happen to a man in his condition, and an 
“exceedingly long life for himself, and his wives, 
‘“‘and his children, and his brethren, may also come 
“to Nesi-Khonsu, and to her children, and to her 
“sisters.” 

Amen-Ra, the king of the gods, the great god, the 
prince of that which hath come into being from the 
beginning, saith :— 

“T erant that all things, of whatever kinds they 
““may be, which a man hath when he is in the state 
“in which Nesi-Khonsu is, and by which he is deified, 
“shall be possessed by her, and I grant that the 
“seventy addresses to Ra may be recited in my name, 
“so that her soul may not be destroyed in the under- 
“world.” 

Amen-Ra, the king of the gods, the great god, the 
prince of that which hath come into being from the 
beginning, saith :— 

“Every good word which can deify Nesi-Khonsu, 
“which will give her power to receive water and offer- 
“ings, and which shall be uttered or said before me by 
“any person whatsoever I will fulfil to the uttermost, 
“omitting nothing. Every good word which shall be 
‘uttered before me on behalf of Nesi-Khonsu I will 
“fulfil at every season of the heavens when Shu 
“eometh forth, in such wise that none of the evil 


654 PAPYRUS OF NESI-KHONSU 


“things which can reach a person who is in the con- 
“dition in which she is shall touch her at any season 
“of the heavens, when Shu cometh forth from the 
“waters with his weapons and when day beginneth in 
“the sky. And I will utterly do away with the evil 
“effect of every word which may be spoken by any 
“person whatsoever of a being who is in the state in 
“which is Nesi-Khonsu, omitting nothing, at every 
“season of the heavens when Shu cometh forth from 
“the waters with his weapons and when day beginneth 
“in the sky.” 

Amen-Ra, the king of the gods, the great god, the 
prince of that which hath come into being from the 
beginning, saith :— 

‘“‘T have caused the seventy addresses to Ra to be 
“recited in my name, and I have not allowed any 
“single benefit which belongeth to a man who is in 
“the condition in which is Nesi-Khonsu to escape her. 
“And I have caused her to receive offerings, bread, 
“and ale, and unguents, and wine, and pomade, and 
“milk, and raisins (?); and I have caused her to re- 
“ceive all the benefits and all the good things which 
‘a being who is in her condition and who is favoured 
“by me and who hath been deified can receive; and I 
“have caused her to share equally with every god and 
“every goddess every good thing whatsoever which 
“those who have been deified in the underworld re- 
“ceive; and I have caused her to receive her divine 
“offerings along with the gods.” 


PAPYRUS OF NESI-KHONSU 655 


Amen-Ra, the king of the gods, the great god, the 
prince of that which hath come into being from the 
beginning, saith :— 

“If the word by which the offering of Sekhet-Aaru 
‘Cand of a field in Sekhet-Aaru is made is not one 
“which is good for the person who is in the condition 
“in which is Nesi-Khonsu, and it hath no effect, I my- 
“self will make unto her the offering of Sekhet-Aaru and 
“of a field in Sekhet-Aaru, when that which is beneficial 
“for her in this kind of offering shall come into being, 
‘“‘and it shall suffer no diminution thereof whatsoever.” 

Amen-Ra, the king of the gods, the great god, the 
prince of that which hath come into being from the 
beginning, saith :— 

“All good things which shall be spoken in my pre- 
“‘sence, saying, ‘Let such and such things be done 
“for Nesi-Khonsu, the daughter of Ta-hennu-Tehu- 
“ti-a,’ I will perform for her, and they shall not be 
“lessened, and they shall not be abrogated, and nothing 
“therefrom shall be cut off at every season of the 
“heavens when Shu cometh forth. And, moreover, 
‘she shall receive in abundance the choicest things 
‘of all that is good for her, even as do every man 
“and every god who have been deified, and who go 
“forth and who come in, and who journey unto every 
“place as they please.” 

Amen-Ra, the king of the gods, the great god, the 
prince of that which hath come into being from the 
beginning, saith ;— 


656 PAPYRUS OF NESI-KHONSU 


“As concerning all good things which have been 
‘spoken in my presence, that is to say, ‘Perform them 
“for Pa-netchem, the son of Auset-em-khebit, my ser- 
“vant, and for his wives, and his children, and his 
“brethren, and his friends, and for those for whom 
“his heart is afraid lest evil come upon them’: be- 
“hold, I will send forth my great and mighty and holy 
“word into every place that it may cause every good 
“thing to. be with Pa-netchem, and his wives, and his 
“children, and his brethren, and all his friends, in 
“such wise that if any man shall omit to say, ‘Let the 
“decree of Amen-Ra, the king of the gods, the great 
‘ood, the prince of that which hath come into being 
“from the beginning, be performed,’ I myself will 
“make that which the great god hath spoken to come 


“to pass.” 


657 


A BOOK OF THE DEAD 
OF THE GRAECO-ROMAN PERIOD. 


THE BOOK OF BREATHINGS. 


[From the Papyrus of Kerasher (Brit. Mus. No. 9995, sheet 2). ] 


I. HERE BEGINNETH THE Book oF BREATHINGS. 

(1) “Hail, Osiris Kerasher, the son of Tashenatit ! 
“Thou art pure, and thy heart is pure. The fore-parts 
“of thee are pure, (2) thy hind-parts are cleansed, and 
“thy interior is made clean with let incense and 
“natron; no member of thine hath any defect what- 
“soever. The Osiris Kerasher, (3) the son of Tashen- 
“atit, hath been cleansed by means of the waters of 
“Sekhet-hetep (7.e., Field of Peace) which is situated 
“to the north of Sekhet-Sanehem (.e., Field of the 
“ Grasshoppers). (4) The goddesses Uatchit and Nekh- 
“ebet make thee to be pure at the eighth hour of the 
“night and at the [eighth] hour of the day. Come, 
“then, O Osiris (5) Kerasher, the son of Tashenatit, 
“and enter into the Hall of Maati. Thou art pure 
“from all offence and from (6) defect of every kind ; 
«Stone of Right and Truth’ is thy name.” 

VOL, III. K 


658 THE BOOK OF BREATHINGS. 


“Hail, [Osiris] Kerasher, the son of Tashenatit! Thou 
“enterest the Tuat (7.e., underworld) (7) as one mighty 
“in purity. Thou art purified by the two Maat god- 
“desses in the Great Hall. A libation hath been made 
“for thee in the Hall of Seb, and thy body hath been 
“made pure (8) in the Hall of Shu. Thou lookest 
“upon Ra when he setteth as Tem at eventide. Amen 
“is nigh unto thee to give thee air, (9) and Ptah like- 
‘wise to mould into form thy members, thou enterest 
“the horizon along with Ra. They receive thy soul in 
“the Neshem boat of Osiris, (10) they make thy soul 
“divine in the House of Seb, and they make thee to 
‘be triumphant for ever and for ever,” 

“{ Hail] Osiyis Kerasher, the son of Tashenatit! (11) 
‘‘Thy name is made to endure, thy material body is 
‘‘stablished, and thy spiritual body is made to ger- 
“minate; thou art turned back neither in heaven nor 
“upon earth. ‘Thy face shineth before (12) Ra, thy 
“soul liveth before Amen, and thy material body is 
“renewed before Osiris. Thou breathest for ever and 
“for ever, thy soul maketh offerings unto thee (13) 
“of cakes, and ale, and beasts, and feathered fowl, 
“and cool water in the course of each day; thou 
“comest, and it is triumphant. The flesh is upon 
‘‘thy bones, (14) and thy form is even as it was upon 
“earth. Thou takest drink into thy body, thou eatest 
“with thy mouth, and thou receivest bread along with 
“the souls (15) of the gods. The god Anubis pro- 
“‘tecteth thee, and he maketh himself thy protector ; 


THE BOOK OF BREATHINGS 659 


“thou art not turned away from the gates of the Tuat 
“(i.e., underworld), Thoth, the most mighty (16) god, 
“the lord of Khemennu, cometh to thee, and he 
“writeth for thee the Book or Brearurinas with 
“his own fingers. [Then] doth thy soul breathe for 
“(17) ever and ever, and thy form is made anew with 
“life upon earth; (18) thou art made divine along with 
“the souls of the gods, thy heart is the heart of Ra, 
“and thy members (19) are the members of the great 
Seods 

“fail, Osiris Kerasher, the son of Tashenatit! 
“Amen is nigh unto thee (20) to make thee to live 
“again. And the god Ap-uat (ie, the Opener of the 
“ways) hath opened up for thee a prosperous path. 
“Thou seest with thine eyes, thou hearest with thine 
“ears, thou speakest with thy mouth, (21) and thou 
“walkest with thy legs. Thy soul hath been made 
“divine in the Tuat so that it may make every trans- 
“formation; at thy will thou breathest with delight 
“{the odours] of (22) the holy Persea tree of Annu 
“(i.e., Heliopolis). Thou wakest each day and seest 
“the rays of Ra. Amen cometh to thee (23) having 
“the breath of life, and he causeth thee to draw thy 
“breath within thy funeral house. Thou appearest 
“pon the earth each day, and the Book or BrEatu- 
“tas of Thoth (24) is a protection unto thee, for 
“thereby dost thou draw thy breath each day, and 
“thereby do thine eyes behold the beams of the divine 
“Disk, The goddess of Right and Truth maketh 


660 THE BOOK OF BREATHINGS. 


“speech on thy behalf before Osiris, (25) and her 
“writings are upon thy tongue. Horus, the avenger 
“of his father, protecteth thy body, he maketh thy soul 
“to be divine like those of all the gods.” 

II. (1) “The god Ra vivifieth thy soul, and the soul 
‘of Shu uniteth the passages of thy nostrils.” — 

‘Hail, Osiris Kerasher, (2) the son of Tashenatit! 
“Thy soul draweth its breath in the place which thou 
“lovest. Thou art even as Osiris. Osiris the Governor 
“of those in Amentet is thy name. (3) The water-flood 
‘of the Prince cometh unto thee from Abu (Hlephan- 
‘‘tine), and it filleth thy table of offerings with tchefau 
“food.” 

‘“(Hail] Osiris Kerasher, (4) the son of Tashenatit ! 
“The gods of the South and of the North come unto 
“thee, and thou art-led by them to the ends of the 
“countries of (5) millions of years. Thy soul liveth, 
“thou art in the following of Osiris, and thou drawest 
“thy breath in Re-stau ; the strength which protecteth 
“thee (6) is hidden in the lord of Setet and [in] the 
“oreat god. Thy material body liveth in Tattu [and 
“in| Nif-urtet, and thy soul liveth im heaven (7) each 
e dayee 

“|Hail] Osiris Kerasher, the son of Tashenatit! the 
“goddess Sekhet hath gained the mastery over what 
“is baleful to thee, Heru-aa-(8)abu protecteth thee, 
“‘Heru-seshet-hra maketh thy heart, aid Heru-maati 
“protecteth thy body,” or as others say, (9) “thy 
“tongue. Thou art stablished with life, and strength, 


_~ 


THE BOOK OF BREATHINGS. 661 


“and health, and thou art firmly seated upon thy 
“throne in Ta-tchesertet. Come, then, Osiris Kerasher, 
(10), the son of Tashenatit, thou risest in thy form, 
“thou art arrayed in thine ornaments, thou hast firm 
“hold upon life, thou passest thy days (11) in health, 
“thou journeyest hither and thither, and thou drawest 
“thy breath in every place whatsoever. Ra riseth 
‘“‘upon thine abode even as Osiris; thou drawest thy 
“breath, (12) and thou livest through his rays. Amen- 
“ Ra-Heru-khuti vivifieth thy ha (7.e., double), and he 
“maketh thee to flourish by means of the Boox or 
“BREATHINGS. Thou (15) art in the following of 
“ Osiris-Horus, the lord of the Hennu Boat; thou art 
“like the great god at the head of the gods. Thy face 
“liveth, O thou whose births are lovely; thy name 
(14) blossometh each day. Thou goest into the most 
“mighty and divine Hall in Tattu; thou seest him 
“that is head of those in Amentet during the Uka 
“festival. The odour of thee (15) is sweet like that of 
“the venerable ones [therein], and thy name is magni- 
“fied like those of the divine spiritual bodies.” 

“ Hail, Osiris Kerasher, the son of (16) Tashenatit! 
“Thy soul liveth through the Book or BREATHINGS, 
“thou art united through the Book or BREATHINGS, 
“(17) thou enterest into the Tuat and hast no enemy 
“therein. Thou art as a living soul in Tattu and 
“thou hast thine heart, which hath not departed 
“from thee. Thou hast (18) thine eyes, and they 
“open daily.” . 


662 THE BOOK OF BREATHINGS. 


The gods who are in the train of Osiris speak unto 
Osiris Kerasher, the son of Tashenatit, (19) saying :— 

“Thou followest Ra and thou followest Osiris, and 
“thy soul doth live for ever and ever.” 

The gods who dwell in the Tuat (20) of Osiris, the 
Governor of those in Amentet, speak unto Osiris Ker- 
asher, the son of Tashenatit, saying :— 

“The gates of the Tuat are opened unto him, (21) 
“let him show himself in Neter-khertet. Verily, his 
‘soul shall live for ever, he shall build habitations for 
“himself in (22) Neter-khertet, the god thereof shall 
“show favour unto his ka, and he shall receive the 
“Book or Breatuines, and verily he shall (23) draw 
“his breath.” 


“May Osiris, the Governor of those in Amentet, the 
“oreat god, the lord of Abydos, grant a royal oblation ; 
“may he give offerings of cakes, (24) and ale, and oxen, 
“and wine, and aget drink, and bread, and tchefaw food, 
“and all beautiful things to the a of Osiris Kerasher, 
(25) the son of Tashenatit. Thy Soul doth live, and 
“thy material body doth germinate by the command of 
“Ra himself; thou shalt never perish and thou shalt 
“never suffer diminution, ITT. (1) [but shalt be] like 
‘“‘ Ra for ever and for ever.” 


“Hail, Usekh-nemtet, who comest forth from Annu, 
“the Osiris Kerasher, the son of (2) Tashenatit, hath 
“not committed sin.” 


THE BOOK OF BREATHINGS. 663 


“Hail, Ur-at, who comest forth from Kher-aha, the 
“Osiris Kerasher, the son of Tashenatit, (3) hath not 
“done deeds of violence.” 

“Hail, Fenti, (4) who comest forth from Khemennu, 
‘‘the Osiris Kerasher, the son of Tashenatit, (5) hath 
“not committed slaughter (?).” 

“ Hail, Amam-maat, who comest forth from the two 
“Qerti, the Osiris Kerasher (6), the son of Tashenatit, 
“hath not plundered the possessions of the dead.” 

“ Hail, Neha-hra, (7) who comest forth from Re-stau, 
“the Osiris Kerasher, the son of Tashenatit, (8) hath 
‘‘not inflicted injury.” 

“Hail, Rereti, who comest forth from heaven, the 
“Osiris (9) Kerasher, the son of Tashenatit, hath not 
“committed sins of . . . . of the heart.” 

“ Hail, Maati-em-khet, (10) who comest forth from 
““Sekhem, the Osiris Kerasher, the son of Tashenatit, 
(11) hath not made revolt.” 


“Hail, ye gods who are in the Tuat, hearken ye 
“unto the voice of Osiris Kerasher, the (12) son of 
“Tashenatit, and let him come before you, for there 
“is neither any evil whatsoever, nor any sin whatso- 
“ever (13) with him, and no accuser can stand [before 
“him]. He liveth upon Maat, he feedeth upon Maat, 
“and he hath satisfied (14) the heart of the gods by 
“all that he hath done. He hath given food to the 
“hungry, and water to the thirsty, and clothes (15) to 
“the naked. He hath made offerings to the gods, and 


664 THE BOOK OF BREATHINGS. 


“to the Khus, and no (16) report whatsoever hath been 
“made against him before the gods. O come, let him 
“enter the Tuat and not be repulsed; (17) come, let 
“him follow Osiris with the gods of the Qerti. Let 
“him be a favoured being among the favoured ones, 
(18) and let him be divine among the perfect ones. 
““Come, let him live; come, let his soul live. Let his 
“soul (19) be received in whatsoever place it pleaseth, 
‘‘and let him receive the Book or Brearurtnas. (20) 
“Come, let him draw breath with his soul in the Tuat, 
“and let him perform (21) whatsoever transformations 
“he will along with those who are in Amentet. Come, 
“let his soul go into every place where it would be, and 
“Jet it live upon earth for ever, and for ever, and for 
“ever.” 


665 


A BOOK OF THE DEAD OF THE 
ROMAN PERIOD! 


[From British Museum Papyrus No. 10,112. ] 


“Hail, Hathor Takhert-p-uru-abt, triumphant, born 
“of Thent-nubt, triumphant. Thy soul liveth in 
“heaven before Ra, gifts are made unto thy ka before 
“the gods, thy spiritual body is glorious among the 
“ Khus, thy name is stablished upon earth before Seb, 
“and thy body shall endure permanently in the Neter- 
“khert (underworld or tomb). Thy house is in the 
“possession of thy children and thy husband, who weep 
“as they follow thee when thou goest about therein 
“with thy children; and they are rewarded for what 
“they have done for thy ka. [They have given thee] 
“good and perfect burial, and they make offerings to 
“thy ka at the west of Thebes in the sight of the folk 
“of thy city and of the Lady of the Temples. The 
- “beautiful Amentet stretcheth out her hands to receive 
“thee according to the decree of the Lady of Abydos. 
“Thy tomb shall never be overthrown, thy swathings 


1 See Birch, P.S.B.A., Vol. VIL., p. 49; and Lieblein, Que mon 
nom flewrisse, p. 1. : 


666 THE BOOK OF BREATHINGS. 


“shall never be torn in pieces, and thy body shall never 
“be mutilated. The god Anubis hath received thee in 
“the land of the Hall of Double Maat, and he hath 
“made thee to be one of those favoured and perfect 
“beings who are in the following of Seker. Thy soul 
“flieth up on high to meet the soul of the gods, and it 
“hovereth also over thy dead body which is in Akert. 
“Thou journeyest about upon the earth, thou seest all 
“that are therein, thou observest all the affairs of thy 
“house, and thou eatest bread, there having been per- 
“formed by thee transformations which are like unto 
“those of Baba. Thou goest to the city of Nif-urtet 
“at the festival of the altars on the night of the fes- 
‘‘tival of Six, and at the festival of Anep. Thou goest 
“into the city of Nif-urtet at the festival of the little 
“heat, and the festival of lifting up the sky. Thou 
‘‘ ooest into the city of Tattu on the festival of Ka-hra- 
“]ka, on the day when the Tet is set up. The breath 
“of the wind hath made thy throat to breathe with 
“Khensu and Shu, the mighty one, in Thebes; and 
“thou hast abundant offerings for thy ka every tenth 
“day with the living image of Rain Thebes. Thy life 
“is for ever and ever, and thy sovereignty is for ever, 
“and thou shalt endure for an endless number of 
“Heriods of twice sixty years.” 


PNeDIERX 


Aa, a god of the third Arit, 
475 

Afaa-kheru, 443 

Aaapef, 167 

Aahet, 254 

Aahet-At, 254 

Aahet-Ateh, 254 

Aakhabit, 457, 459 

Aa-maa-kheru, a god of the 
seventh Arit, 478 

Aaqet flowers, 160 

Aaqetq et, 91 

Aa-sekhemu, a god, 500 

Aat I., 485 

Aat IL., 486 

Aat III., 487 

Aat IV., 488 

Aat V., 489 

Aat VI., 490 

Aat VIT., 490 

Aat VIIL., 491 

Aat IX., 492 

Aat X., 493 

Aat XI., 495 

Aat XII, 495 

Aat XIII, 496 

Aat XIV., 498 

Aati, 368, 617 


Aat of Flame, 106 

Aatqetqet, 101 

Aat-urt, 437 

Aats, names of the, 499, 500 

Ab-ka, 226 

Ab priest, the, 43 

Abait, the, 310 

Abet-ka, 226 

Abt-Chamber, 589 

Abtu, city of, in Upper Egypt, 
9, 18, 19, 20, 44, 45, 66, 70, 91, 
97, 113, 119, 120, 125, 126, 128, 
129, 262, 345, 347, 348, 354, 
355, 387, 415, 424, 429, 449, 
462, 463, 474, 475, 576, 588, 
617, 631. 

Abtu Fish, 6, 9, 78, 304 

Abu (Elephantine, Aswan), 358, 
498, 591, 660 

Abuse, 370 

Abut, green, 304 

Abu-ur, 175 

Abydos, 9, 18, 19, 20, 44, 45, 66, 
70, 91, 97, 118, 119, 120, 125, 
128, 129, 213, 262, 308, 345, 
347, 348, 354, 355, 387, 415, 
423, 424, 429, 449, 462, 662, 
665 


668 


Abydos, Funeral Ceremonies of 
Osiris at, 42 

Abyss of water, 13 

Acacia Tree, the, 69, 357 

Adultery, 368 

Aha, god, 552 

Aha-aaiu, 216 

Ahi, a god, 309, 370 

Ahit, 438 

Ah-khebti, 166 

Ahui gods, the, 355 

Air, Chapter of, 166 

Air, Chapter of breathing, 203 

Air, Chapter of living by, 164 

Air, Chapter of snuffing, 199, 
200, 204 

Air, Chapters of giving, 197, 198 

Akau, 213 

Akeb, 640 

Aken-tau-kha-kheru, 443 

Akenti, a doorkeeper, 468 

Aker, the god, 169, 290, 293 

Aker, name of a hold of a boat, 
299 

Akert, 19, 68, 114, 382, 385, 386, 
666 

Akertet, 543 

Akert-khentet-auset-s, the cow, 
481 

Akeru gods, the, 216, 324, 511, 
513 

Akesh, 437 

Akesi, Aat of, 500 

Akesi, city of, 492, 493 

Akhabiu gods, 511 

Akhekhu, 370 

Akhkha, 463 


INDEX 


Akhsesef, the god, 246 

Akriu serpent, 489 

Ale, 242, 243, 265, 301, 354, 377, 
379, 380, 420, 604 

Altars, 432 

Amain, 23, 25, 461 

Amam-maat, 663 

Amehet, 241 

Amemet, 26, 562 

Amen, the god, 62, 67, 323, 535, 
537, 541, 543, 552, 580, 658, 
659 

Amen-em-heb, Papyrus of, 222, 
348 

Amen-hetep, father of the 
Chancellor Nu, 136, 142, 153, 
166, 217, 262, 282, 378, 638, 
639 

Awmen-hetep, Papyrus of, 144, 
151, 163, 580 

Amen-na-an-ka-entek-share, 542 

Amen-Nathekerethi-Amen, 541 

Amen-neb, 141, 149, 361 

Amen-Ra, 14, 645, 648, 650, 651, 
653, 654, 655 ; College of, 3, 18 

Amen-Ra-Heru-khuti, 661 

Ament, 564, 572, 575, 623 

Amenta, 23, 141 

Amentet, the Underworld, 29, 
41, 45, 47, 49, 56, 61, 80, 81, 
82, 84, 85, 86, 92, 94, 100, 102, 
107, 113, 126, 147, 148, 151, 
157, 164, 174, 196, 202, 209, 
211, 213, 259, 281, 


284, 
379, 
394 


p] 


345, 
380, 
398, 


351, 
381, 
401, 411, 


378, 
387, 
462, 


INDEX 


489, 548, 549, 550, 555, 567, 
570, 572, 607, 610, 611, 612 
613, 614, 615, 618, 619, 622, 
631, 633, 634, 643, 649, 660, 
661, 662, 664 

Amentet, Aat of, 485, 500 

Amentet, Bull of, 41 

Amentet, Festivals of, 429 

Amentet, Mountain, 19 

Amenti, 218, 254, 414, 415, 416, 
417, 429, 445, 595, 606, 609 

Am-hauatu-ent-pehui, 475 

Am-huat-ent-peh-fi, 443 

Ambhetet, the six, 52, 77 

Ami-haf, 342 

Ami-seshet, the Fire-god, 540 

Ami-unnut-f, 91 

Am-khent, the priest, 201 

Am-mehet, the, 241,342, 379,499 

Ammehet, Aat of, 490 

Am-met, 366 

Am-mit, 23, 25, 33 

Am-Nit, the god, 453 

Amsu, or Min, 95, 104, 353, 368, 
438, 578 

Amsu-Heru, 461 

Amsu-qet, 485 

Amulet of the god, 410 

Amulets, use of, Ixxvi. 

Am-ur, 449 

An, the god, 20, 68, 537 

An-aarret-f, 358 

An-a-f, 104 

An-arut-f, 129 

Anchor-post, 299 

An-em-hru, 91 

Anenit, 558 


> 


669 


Anep, 666 

Aner, 405 

Anerta-nef-bes-f-khenti-heh-f, 
101 

Anerti, 405 

Anes bandlet, 339 

Anger, 369 

Anhai, Papyrus of, 32, 33, 323, 
366 

An-heri-ertitsa, 236 

An-Heru, 438 

An-hra, 443, 477 

Ani the seribe and his papyrus, 
3, 5, 18, 22, 23, 29, 43, 44, 49, 
56, 57,58, 63, 65, 71, 72—76, 
78, 90, 92, 93, 100, 108, 112, 
114, 115, 117, 118 ff, 131, 132, 
133, 184, 137, 139, 140, 141, 
143, 144, 145, 149, 150, 180 ff, 
184, 185, 186, 187, 190, 202, 
204, 206, 243, 261, 279, 321, 
357, 359, 362, 365, 378, 399, 
402, 403, 470, 473, 474, 475, 
476, 477, 478, 480, 596, 607, 
608, 633 

An-ker-s, the god, 491 

Ankham flowers, 62, 521, 523, 
584 

Ankh-em-fentu, 448, 477] 

Ankhti, 433 

An-maut-f (Eye of Horus), 112, 
492 

An-mut-f, 587 

An-mut-f-ab-ur, 438 

Anniu, 379 

Annu (Heliopolis), 5, 8, 11, 14, 
20, 41, 42, 48, 49, 51, 67, 68, 


670 


95, 103, 110, 125, 128, 129, 
134, 142, 194, 196, 214, 232, 
245, 265, 267, 274, 293, 
342, 343, 344, 355, 362, 366, 
408, 413, 461, 477, 483, 507, 
508, 511, 530, 534, 576, 
594, 603, 616, 632, 640, 
642, 659, 662 

Annu, the gods of, 116 

Annu, the Souls of, 11 

Anpet, 336 

Anpu (Anubis), 17, 23, 25, 30, 
3391045839) 20.9155 LOOM LS: 
119, 120, 137, 1389, 154, 176, 
180, 196, 293, 299, 350, 357, 
359, 424, 427, 438, 454, 461, 
478, 503, 506, 508, 578, 583, 
584, 618 

Anpu, the names of, 438 

Anpu, Temple of, 203 

Anget, the Net, 515 

An-rut-f, 69, 83, 106, 118, 121, 
122, 126, 436, 462, 463 

Ansi garment, 298, 595 

Ant-Boat, 6, 9 

Ant-Fish, 6, 9, 78 

Antebu, 298 

Antes, 68 

Antimony, 377 

Anti unguent, 229, 
358, 540 

Anti water, 304 

Antu unguent, 152 

Anubis, 17, 23, 25, 30, 33, 34, 39, 
40, 91, 100, 101, 105, 109, 123, 
153, 186, 213, 293,307, 358, 
366,419, 425, 445, 462, 497, 


301, 306, 


INDEX 


503, 508, 547, 565, 578, 586, 
606, 658, 666 

Anubis at the bier of the dead, 
46 

An-unser, the cow, 602 

Ape, the dog-headed, 179, 247, 
378 


~ Ape of Thoth, 33 


Apes, Le., the Spirits of Dawn, 
11, 303, 413 

Apes, the Two, ie., Isis and 
Nephthys, 92, 109 

Apes, the Four dog-headed, 183, 
379 

Apes, the Six, 52 

Apes, the Seven, 77, 89 

Apen, 434 

Apep, the Fiend, 6, 8, 54, 58, 59, 
87, 92, 104, 168, 169, 170, 298, 
303, 382, 393, 404, 405, 413, 
427, 445, 477, 488 

Apepi, 92, 297 

Api, the goddess, 421 

Apshait, 161, 162 

Apt, 645 

Apts, the, ie., Karnak, 631 

Apu (Panopolis), 355 

Ap-uat, the jackal-headed god, 
120, 176, 180, 185, 299, 388, 
424, 461, 587, 605, 624, 659 

Aqa, 300 

Agen, the god, 566 

Aqennu, city of, 576 

Aq-her-ami-unnut-f, 101 

Arabian Peninsula, xix. 

Arabs, 247 

Arethikasathika, 542 


INDEX 


Ari-en-ab-f, the god, 334 

Ari-nef-tchesef, 300 

Arits, the Seven, 443, 444, 445, 
473—479 

Arits, the Seven gods of, 440 

Arm of Horus, 117 

Aser tree, 176 

Asert, 605 

Ases, city of, 490, 491 

Ashebu, 443 

Ashemu beings, 430 

Asher, 437 

Ashet, 321 

Ashu, the god, 291 

Asia, 582 

Ass, the, 6 

Ass, the Eater of, 170, 171 

Ags and the Cat, 373 

Assembler of Souls, 203, 350 

Asset, Aat of, 499 

Astchetet-em-A ment, 495 

Astennu, 120 

Astes, 100, 455, 463 

Aswan (Syene), 367 

At, the god, 461 

Atare-am -tchen - qemtu-rennu- 
parsheta, 540 

Ataui, child of Nesi-Khonsu, 652 

Atch-ur, 174 

Atebui, 70 

Atef crown, 26, 57, 182, 373, 387, 
616, 622, 628 

Atek-tau-kehaq-kheru, 477 

Atem, 125 

Atennu, 646 

Atert of the North, 431 

Atert of the South, 431 


671 


Ates-hra-ari-she, 477 

Atet Boat, 5, 6, 8, 10, 11, 76, 78, 
165, 196, 249, 308, 354, 391, 
395, 431, 503, 507, 632 

Athabu, 536 

Ati, 368, 433 

Ati-she-f, 213 

Atma cloth, 417 

Atu, Aat of, 500 

Atu, city of, 494 

Au-a, the god, 300 

Auf-ankh, 62, 68, 124, 125, 127, 
129, 146, 147, 155, 205, 355, 
406, 407, 426, 427, 449-460, 
524, 525, 526, 534 ff, 

Aukert, the Underworld, 16, 
214, 219, 271, 371, 373, 430, 
611, 614 . 

Aukhemu beings, the, 641, 642 

Aurauaa-qersaangrebathi, 534 

Auset-em-khebit, 650, 651, 656 

Auu-ba, the god, 572 


BaAaxKHa, 84 

Baha, 372, 666 

Babe, the, 198, 220 

Backbone, 176, 181 

Bah, 226, 293, 427 

Baiti, 647 

Baket, 433 

Bakhatet, the Mount of Sun- 
rise, 4 

Bakhau, the Mount of Sunrise, 
314, 316, 375, 583, 642 

Balance, 29, 33, 34, 44, 104, 149, 
150, 239, 312, 399, 424, 485 


672 


Balance, Guardian of, 131 

Balance of Ra, 61 

Balance of support of Right and 
Truth, 375 

Balance of wine, 375 

Balance, the Great, 26, 30 

Balance wherein heaven and 
earth are weighed, 5 

Ba-neb-Tattu, 43, 176, 181, 272, 
357 

Barekathatchaua, 534 

Barley, 242, 302 

Barley, red, 308 

Barley, white, 194, 308, 640 

Barley five cubits high, 486 

Barley seven cubits high, 318 

Basti, 369 

Bau, the star, 586 

Beasts made, 13 

Beb, 209 

Beba, 107 

Bebait, 310 

Bebi, 122 

Beetle, emblem of Khepera, 4, 
543 

Begetter of millions of years, 97 

Behutu-tcheser, the boat, 321 

Bekhennu, 542 

Belly, the, 176 

Bener, 437 

Bennu bird, 20, 61, 90, 95, 145, 
187, 188, 194, 214, 220, 249, 
268, 302, 303, 305, 320, 323, 
351, 353, 358, 362, 389, 462, 
614 

Beq, the god, 450, 461 

Bes-maa-em-kerh, 91 


INDEX 


Bet, 209 

Beta, City of, 174 

Beteshu, 434 

Betti, 153 

Bight of Amentet, 48, 106 

Bight of Sekhet-hetep, 548 

Bight of the Lake of Fire, 106 

Birch, Dr., 158, 665 

Birth chamber of the god, 328 

Birth, the second, 218, 623 

Blasphemy, 371 

Blind Horus, 102 

Block, of punishment, 8, 48, 104, 
107, 111 

Block, Chapter of not entering 
to, 191 

Blood of Isis, its power, 522 

Blood, the Eater of, 368 

Boat, Chapter of bringing, 295, 
297 

Boat of Horus, 48 

Boat of Milhons of Years, 539, 
634 

Boat of Ra, 305, 379, 407, 411, 
429 

Boat of Ra, Chapter of entering, 
307 

Body, the physical, lvii., lviii. 

Body, the spiritual, lviii., lxiv. 

Body, the resurrection of, 518- 
520 

Body, the Great Divine, 534. 

Body, Chapter of raising, 603 

Body, Chapter of not letting 
perish, 518-520 

Bolts of the Hall of Maati, 375 

Bones, Crusher of, 367 


INDEX 


Bonomi, xxxv. 

Book of Breathings, 659, 661, 
662, 663, 664 

Book of the Dead, History of, 
xvill.-xlix.; Recensions of, 
xlix.-l. ; of Roman Period, 665 

Book of Revelation, 34 

Books, Chamber of, 626 

Books of Herutataf, 418 

Bows of boat, name of, 300 

Boy in the City, 274 

Brocklehurst Papyrus, 136, 142, 
166, 241, 399, 403 

Bubastis, city of, 368 

Buckle, the, 246, 288, 303, 304 

Buckle of carnelian, 522 

Bull, 194, 207, 254, 335, 430, 
640, 647 

Bull, son of the ancestors of 
Osiris, 476 

Bull, a name of Ra, 516 

Bull-god, the, 321 

Bull-Searab, 537 

Bull, the Red, 446 

Bull of Amentet, 41, 209, 257, 
622, 623 

Bull of Maat, 431 

Bull of Nut, 494 

Bull of Turquoise, 333 

Bull, the Field of, 333 

Burials, pre-dynastic and dy- 
nastic, XVill.-Xxx. 

Burning, Chapter of avoiding, 
208 

Bushel, the light, 367 

Busiris, 19, 43, 355, 368 

Buto, 11 
VOL.) Lr. 


673 


Buttocks, 176, 182 
Byssus cloth, 62 


Cackumr, the Great, 197, 199, 
204 

Cakes, 196, 242, 243, 265, 301, 
354, 377, 379, 380, 410, 420, 
604 

Cakes of Osiris, 138 

Calf of Khera, 318 

Calumny, 367 

Canal of the Geese, 486 

Cardinal points, 29, 99 

Carnelian, heart of, 145 

Cat, 92, 103, 373 

Catcher of fish, 515 

Cedar juice, 419 

Cedar oil, 406 

Chair, 39, 185, 195 


’ Chamber of Books, 626 


Chamber of Torture, 108 

Chaplet laid on the face, 127 

Chaplet of victory, 124 

Chapters of Coming Forth by 
Day, 21, 41, 211, 218 

Cheops, 222 

Chest of the Lords of Kher-aha, 
182 

Child, 175 

Children of Horus, 29, and see 
under Horus 

Children of Osiris, 29 

Circle of Flame, 411 

Collar of Gold, Chapter of, 525 

Combatants, the Two, 623, 625 

Coming Forth by Day, 229-237 

L 


674 


Cone, article of dress, 29 
Conscience, 30 

Copper, 67 

Copts, the, 426 


Yorruption, Chapter of not 
suffering, 186 
Couch, 39 


Cow, the divine, 430, 534 

Cows, the Seven Divine, 482 

Crocodile, 226, 278, 410, 419, 
453 : 

Crocodile, Chapter of repulsing 
the, 153, 155 

Crocodile of the East, 156, 157 

Crocodile of the North, 156, 157 

Crocodile of the South, 156, 157 

Crocodile of the West, 156, 157 

Crook, the, 19 

Crystal, 419 

Crystal, Tablet of, 374, 375 

Cursing the king, 370 

Cusae, 340 


Damyep, burning of the, 104 

Dancing before the god, xxxv. 

Darkness, i.e., Set, 51 

Darkness, House of, 251 

Date-Palm, the, 232 

Dead, rising of the, 67 ° 

Dead, gods of the places of, 431 

Death, 49 

Death, of avoiding the second, 
596, 600 

Death, deliverance from, 174 

Deceit, 368, 370 

Deck, name of Lower, 299 


=” 


INDEX 


Delta, 11, 166, 644 

Devéria, 54 

Devourer, the, 25 

Devourer of Millions of Years, 
106 

Dew, 295 

Disk, the, 15, 71, 76, 78, 82, 84, 
104, 176, 232, 298, 355, 381, 
385, 648 

Divine Mother, 71 

Domain of Neth, 320 

Door of Hall of Maati, names of 
leaves of, 359 

Doorposts in Hall of Maati, 376 

Doors, the hidden, 432 

Doors, leaves of hidden, 432 

Doors of Tuat, 432 

Draughts, playing at, 92 

Ducks, 154 

Dwarf, 541; with two heads, 
539 

Dying, Chapter of not dying a 
second time, 185 


Ear, the right, 62 

Ears = the ears of Ap-uat, 176, 
184 

Earth, 45 

Earth-God, 61 

Earth, ceremony of casting up, 
43 

East, Chapter of not sailing to, 
288 

East, Crocodile of, 156 

East, Emblem of, 303 

Kast, Gods of, 431 


INDEX 


Hast, Roads of, 432 

East, Rudder of, 211, 218, 430 

East, Souls of, 17, 314, 487 

East, Wind of, 154; = Neph- 
thys, 532 

Eater of the Ass, 171, 172 


Eater of the Dead, 21, 23, 25, 


30, 33, 34 

Egg, 177, 179, 197, 304 

Egypt, 19, 424, 538, 626 

Hight Gods, the, 540 

Hileithyiapolis, 11, 70 

Elbow of Shu, 376 

Elephantine, 358, 498, 591, 660 

Elysian Fields, the, lxvii. ff., 20, 
207 

Elysian Fields, Vignettes of, 
319, 322, 325, 329 

Embalmment, City of, 137 

Enemy of Ra, 8 

Ennun bird, 491 

Entrails, Hater of, 368 

Erpat (Seb), 19, 138 

Erta-hen-er-requa, 451 

Ertat-Sebanqa, 466 

Eternity, 16, 67, 207 

Eternity = Day, 95 

Everlastingness, 16, 67 

Everlastingness = Night, 95 

Kyil-is-it, a proper name, 350 

Hye, weighing of, 340 

Eye of seven cubits with pupil 
of three cubits, 306 

Hye paint, 446 

Eye of Horus, 56, 80, 85, 91, 
106, 109, 172, 176, 182, 185, 
216, 219, 229, 255, 280, 283, 


675 
286, 299, 366, 399, 415, 416, 
417, 421, 422, 444, 489, 495, 
592, 593, 603, 605, 606 
Hye of Osiris, 209, 478 
Kye of Ra, 80, 83, 91, 92, 98, 99, 
100, 106, 111, 216, 239, 262, 
303, 362, 377, 426; Eyes of 
Ra, 48 
Eye of Tem, 80, 283 
Kyes, the Two, 10; the opening 
of, 138 
Hyes of the deceased = the eyes 
of Hathor, 176, 180 


Fa-Axn, the god, 499 

Face = Face of the Disk, or Ra, 
176, 180 

Faces, the Two divine, 212, 219 

Falsehood, 367 

False weights, 361 

Fa-pet, the god, 500 

Fate, 598 

Father, the Divine in Annu, 
274 

Father and mother in the 
Underworld, Ixx1., 194, 640 

Fayyim, 368 

Feather of Maat, 4, 30 

Feet, 176 

Feet, Chapter of lifting up, 244 

Feet, dominion over, 286 

Feet = the feet of Ptah, 183 

Fenkhu, 374 

Fenti, 367, 663 

Field of the Bull, 333 

Field of Fire, 296 


676 


Field of the Grasshoppers, 374, 
657 

Field of Kher-aha, 497 

Field of Peace, 657 

Field of Ra, 614 

Fields, gods of, 431 

Fighters, the Two, 98, 352 

Fighting Gods, the Two, 246 

Filth, Chapter of not eating, 
194, 195 

Fine linen of kings, 306 

Finger of Nemu, 515 

Fingers, 176; of Horus, 299 

Fingers = the fingers of Orion, 
183 

Fire, 129, 209; escape from, 124 

Fire, Lake of, 106, 183, 210, 239, 
378 

Fire, Pool of, 135 

Fire, son of, 184 

Fish, 420 

Fish, the Catcher of, 515 

Fish, the Great, 279 

Five gods, 627 

Flame, circle of bright, 411 

Flame, a god, 367 

Flame, speech of, 504 

Flame, Temple of, 431 

Flames, Chapter of Four, 414 

Flaming beings, 432 

Flesh = the flesh of Osiris, 182 

Flint, knives of, 153 

Flint, sceptre of, 374 

Flints, 367 

Floor of the Hall of Maati, 376 

Flower Bush, 142 

Flowers at funerals, 39 


INDEX 


Flowers, Lake of, 138 

Fly-flapper, 423 

Followers of Horus, 306, 479 
(see under Horus) 

Followers of Ra, 314 

Food, prayer for clean, 193 

Fore-arms, 176 

Fore-arms = the fore-arms of 
Neith, 181 

Forehead of Ra, 56 

Fornication, 361 

Forty-two Assessors, the, 148, 
356 

Fouquet, Dr., xxi. 

Four Altars, the, 428 

Four Birth-places in Abydos, 
438 

Four doors in Heaven, 531 

Four Fires, 416, 417, 418 

Four Flames, 414 

Four glorious Gods, 573 

Four Khus, 293 

Four men of Horus, 417 

Four Rudders, names of the, 
482, 483 

Four vessels of blood, 446 

Four vessels of milk, 446 

Funeral ceremonies, 40 

Funeral offerings, gods of, 431 

Funeral procession, 38 


Gap, the, 575 
Gates, the secret, 60 
Geese, 154 

Geese, Canal of, 318 
Giver of winds, 375 


INDEX 


Gizeh, 221 

Goad, 203 

God, the Eater of his arm, 59 

God with face turned behind 
him, 288, 369 

God, ithyphallic, 542 

God of Light, 261 

God of Lifted Hand, 538, 543 

God of Millions of Years, 96 

God One, 13 

God, the self-born, 93 

Goddess, with red hair, 430 

Gods, the Five, 627 

Gods, the Eight, 540 

Gods, are the names of Ra, 93 

Gods, Great Company of, 33, 
429, 580 

Gods, Little Company of, 33, 
429, 580 

Gods, the Living, 177 

Gods, in visible forms, 192 

Gods of the East, 65, 168, 431 

Gods of the Fields, 431 

Gods of the funeral offerings, 431 

Gods of the Great House, 431 

Gods of the horizon, 431 

Gods of the Nesti, 482 

Gods of the North, 65, 168, 431 

Gods of the Perti, 431 

Gods of the places of the dead, 
431 

Gods of the South, 65, 168, 431 

Gods of the Temple of Flame, 
431 

Gods of the Thigh, 431 

Gods of the West, 65, 168, 431 

Gold, 151, 152 


677 


Goose, 106, 295 

arain, black, 641 

Grain, red, 232, 640 

Grain, white, 232, 641 

Grasshoppers, Field of the, 374, 
657 

Great Bear, 100, 239 

Great Green Lake, 96, 97 

Great Green Water, 91 

Great Holder of the hammer, 43 

Great House, 131, 352, 431 

Great Illuminer, 195 

Great One, 184 

Greeks, 64, 70 

Green clay, 419, 420 

Greyhound, 213 

Greyhounds, 135 

Greyhounds of Horus, 61 

Ground, name of, 301 

Guardian of the Balance, 131 

Guardian of doors, 432 

Guardian of funeral mountain, 
432 

Guardian of givers of food, 432 

Guardian of the Hall, 376 

Guardian of heaven, 191 

Guieyesse, 631 


Haas, 171 

Ha-hetep, the god, 491 

Hai, the god, 171, 463 

Hair, 180 

Hair-cloud, 98 

Hair, day of cutting off, 191 
Hair of embalmment, 299 
Hair, Lake of, 296 


678 


Hair, lock of, 342, 413 

Hair of deceased = hair of Nu, 
176 
Hair-Raiser, 350 

Hair, red, 430 

Hake, festival of, 119, 126, 199/ 

2, “471, 643 

See 473 

Hall, the Great, 658 

Hall of Maati, 22, 363 

Hall of Osiris, 148, 172 

Hall of Seb, 658 

Hall of Shu, 658 

Hammemet beings, 188 

Hands, the, 176 

Hands of, deceased = hands of 
Ba-neb-Tattu, 181 

Hap Cow, the, 574 

Hap, or Hapi, the Nile, 13, 70, 
105, 205, 232, 471, 497, 499, 
500, 576, 605 

Hapi, child of Horus, one of the 
Four Genii, 25, 29, 81, 91, 99, 
100, 101, 118, 227, 300, 336, 
337, 416, 417, 428, 429, 431; 
speech of, 505 

Hapiu, 299, 642 

Hapt-re, 373 

Hap-ur, 200 

Haqahakaher, 534 

Haqau, 300 

Hare-god, 321 

Harepukaka-share-sha-baiu, 540 

Harethi, 536 

Harmachis, 16, 22, 23, 67, 72, 
84, 317, 318, 383, 426 

Harpocrates, 64, 112, 114, 547 


INDEX 


Harpoon, 342 

Ha-sert, Aat of, 499 

Hast, 320, 334 

Hatet unguent, 417 

Hathor, 15, 16, 23, 25, 93, 
169, 170, 176, 180, 194, 

908, 231, 232, 266, 284, 309, 
314, 376, 403, 427, 445, 504, 
545, 580, 633, 634, 640, 665 

Haughtiness, 371 

Hawk, 61, 106, 295, 351 ; a type 
of Osiris, 402 

Hawk, human-headed=soul,187 

Hawk, Divine, transformation 
into, 250 

Hawk of Gold, transformation 
into, 248 

Hawk, 1000 cubits long 
2000 cubits wide, 328 

Hawks, the Two, -1.e., 
Nephthys, 212, 218 

Head, Chapter of not letting it 
be cut off, 84 

Heart, the Weighing of, 22 ff., 
31, 32 

Heaet Chapters concerning, 21, 
140, 142, 144, 145, 148, .150 

Heart of Osiris, 48, 107 

Hearts, House of, 138 

Hearts swallowed, 106 

Heat, Chapter to preserve, 533 

Heaven, 45 ; of fire, 377 

Hebet-re-f, hippopotamus, 496 

Heh, the god, 215, 366 

Hehi, 219 

Heir, the Divine, 209 

Heker festival, 458 


and 


Isis and 


INDEX 


He-kennut, 437 

Heliopolis (Annu, On), 5, 11, 14, 
20, 42, 48, 51, 67, 95, 103, 109, 
110, 116, 125, 128, 129, 134, 
194, 214, 232, 245, 265, 340, 
355, 362, 408, 413, 477, 
507, 508, 511, 530, 534, 586, 
616, 659 

Hell, 45 

Hemak, 437 

Hemaka, the Chancellor, xxxiv. 


Hemat, 320 

Hemati, 256, 257 

Hem-Nu, 262 

Hemti, 215 

Hena, 435 

Henbi, 614 

Henket, 435 

Henkit, Chapters of stablishing 
and arranging, 572, 577 

Hennu, the god, xxxiil., 221, 
450 

Hennu Boat, xxxvi., 43, 217, 
244, 303, 511, 661 

Henti-Requ, a doorkeeper, 467 

Hent-she, 230 


Heq-at, 369 

Heqtit, 438 

Her-ab-maat-f, god, 292 

Heracleopolis, 43, 69, 93, 96, 107, 
109, 355, 362, 367, 417 

Heracleopolites Nome, 69 

Heri-sep-f, 107 

Hermopolis Magna, 26, 52, 56, 
142, 149, 151, 199, 204, 271, 
297, 340, 341, 343, 367, 418 

Heron, transformation into, 270 


679 


Her-ta, 570 

Hertit, 168 

Heru-aa-abu, 660 

Heru-em-khebit, 471, 472 

Heru-khentet-an-maati, 438 

Heru-khenti-an-maati, 91, 101, 
102, 117, 293 

Heru-khent-khatthi, 438 

Heru-khuti (Harmachis) 4, 16, 
67, 68, 72, 84, 290, 317, 383, 
426 

Heru-khuti-Temu-Khepera, 9 

Heru-maati, 661 

Heru-netch-hra-tef-f, 102, 117 

Heru-pa-khrat (Harpocrates), 
64, 112, 114 

Heru-sa-Ast, 438 

Heru-sekhai, 438 

Heru-seshet-hra, 660 

Heru-ta-ta-f, xxxiv., 151, 222, 
418 

Heru-Tehuti, 438 

Heru-uatch-f, a name of Horus, 
337 

Heru-ur (Haroeris), 413, 438 

Hesart, 437 

Hesepti, xxxill., 210, 217, 221, 
396 

Hesmen, Temple of, 581 

Het-benbenet, 426, 487 

Hetemet-baiu, 500 

Hetep, city of, 824 

Hetep, god of, 327, 328, 331, 332 

Hetep, Lake of, 320, 324 

Hetepi, god, 614 

Hetep-mes, 461 

Hetep-sekhus, 99, 100 


680 


Hetepu gods, 612, 613 

Het-ka-Ptah (Memphis), 67, 
139, 179, 313, 320, 367, 437, 
617 

Het-kau-Nebt-er-tcher, the cow, 
481 

Het-ur, 607 

Hidden Faces, 432 

Hidden Gates, 432 

Hippopotamus, 421 

Hips and legs, 176 

Hit, 215 

Hold of the boat, 299 

Holy Mountain, 47 

Horizon, gods of, 431 

Horizons, the two, 4 

Horus, son of Isis, 17, 23, 
26, 29, 34, 41, 42, 46, 56, 57, 
60, 69, 81, 94, 98, 107, 109, 
119, 123, 125, 126, 128, 
133, 144, 154, 163, 165, 
177, 179, 198, 238, 246, 252, 
253, 257, 258, 276, 283, 
299, 324, 325, 328, 336, 337, 
338, 339, 366, 372, 387, 388 
397, 399, 404, 405, 406, 
408, 411, 421, 423, 424, 426, 
444, 450, 451, 452 ff., 479, 489, 

495, 511, 512, 

568, 572, 576, 579, 583, 584 

587, 592, 593, 594, 597, 598, 
601, 603, 604, 606, 611, 618, 
623, 626, 639, 641, 660 

Horus and Set, fight between, 
51, 614 

Horus, arm and shoulder of, 
117 


25, 
57 


INDEX 


Horus, avenger of his father, 
82, 95, 101 

Horus the Blue-eyed, 602 

Horus Brethren, 625 

Horus, Children of, 91, 333, 334, 
353, 438, 620 

Horus, double head of, 104 

Horus dwelling in Darkness, 18, 
105 

Horus, Followers of, 7, 26, 29, 
114, 302, 306, 568 

Horus, gods in train of, 99 

Horus, Greyhounds of, 61 

Horus, Lake of, 61 

Horus of the Two Horns, 4 

Horus, Pillars of, 118 

Horus-Ra, 77 

Horus-Seker, 29 

Horus-Sept, 29, 423 

Horus, speeches of to Osiris, 
589—592 

Horus the Child (Harpocrates), 
64 

Horus the Elder, 105 

Horus the Pilot, 78 

Horus the Red-eyed, 602 

Horus the Steersman, 6, 9. 

Honse, Chapter of 
508 

House of the Aged One, 41 

House of Fire, 136 

House of Hearts, 138 

House of Osiris, 105 

House of the ka of Ptah, see 
Het-ka-Ptah 

Hra-f-ha-f, 373 

Hra-k-en-Maat, 153 


building, 


rah eye we 


INDEX 681 


Hu, the god, 23, 25 
397, 462, 463, 516 
Hu-kheru, 443 
Hull, name of, 300 
iMunefer, 12, 115, 31, 33,-34, 35, 
52, 77, 86, 89, 103, 149, 624 
Hunger, of avoiding, 361, 639 
Hu-tchefa, 450 
Hyaenas, 135 


b) 


76, 98, 271, 
, 576 


Izts, 274 

Image of gold, 401 

Immortality, liv. ff. 

Incense, 39, 242, 377, 402, 428 

Ink-jar, 289, 290, 597 

Insolence, 371 

Intestines, 99 

Intimidation, 369 

Inundation, the, 200, 220, 226, 
357 

Treqai, 543 

Tron, block or slab of, 151, 217 

Tron firmament, 393 

Tron floor of heaven, 12 

Tron instrument, knife, or 
weapon, 133, 391, 397, 418 

Jron walls, 318, 486 

Isis, 7, 8, 10, 17, 18, 23, 25, 29, 
34, 39, 42, 46, 67, 71, 73, 77, 
80, 85, 89, 90, 92, 95, 107, 109, 
110, 111, 117, 118, 119, 120, 
123, 125, 126, 133, 163, 166, 
176, 181, 203, 218, 220, 238, 
251, 255, 282, 299, 300, 301, 
302, 303, 307, 331, 337, 387, 
388, 403, 405, 412, 423, 427, 


430, 438, 453, 493, 503, 512, 
515, 522, 532, 579, 580, 604, 
618, 620, 627 


JACKAL of jackals, 198 
Jackals, 154 

Jaws of Seb, 138 
Judgment, liv. ff., 21 ff. 
Judgement, Day of, 41 
Judgement Hall, 22, 30 
Judgment, haste in, 370 
Judgment Scene, 149 


Ka, the, lix., life of, how sus- 
tained, 14 

Ka, offerings to, 311 

Kaa, the god, 296 

Ka-ari-ka, 542 

Kaharesapusaremkakaremet, 
540 

Ka-hetep, 388 

Ka-hra-ka, 666 

Kasaika, 542 

Ka-tchai-kauit, the Bull of the 
Seven Cows, 482 

Kaui, Lake of, 367 

Keel, the name of, 300 

Kefaui, 462 

Kehkehet, goddess, 246 

Kemkem, 246 

Kemur, 63 

Kenemet, 370 

Kenemti, 370 

Kenken-ur, 197, 199 

Kenset, 537, 605 


682 


Kenur, 63 

Kerasher, 657, 658, 659, 
661, 662, 663 

Kerur, 63 

Kesemu-enenet, 256 

Kesemuti-enenet, 256 

Kesi, 340 

Kha, boat of, 408 

Kha, god, 408 

Kha, Lake of, 320 

Khare, Papyrus of, 286 

Karsatha, 534 

Kharu, Lake of, 317 

Khas, 369, 376, 603 

Khat, 336 

Khati gods, 463 

Khau-tchet-f, 454 

Khebent, the goddess, 246 

Khemennu (Hermopolis), 26, 93, 
142, 149, 151, 212, 217, 221, 
344, 367, 507, 659, 663 

Khemi, 369 

Khenemet-em-ankh-annuit, the 
Cow, 482 

Khensu, 269, 517, 666 

Khenti-Amenti (Osiris), 
300 

Khenti-heh-f, 91 

Khenti-khas, 176 

Khepera, creator of the gods, 4, 
72, 92, 106, 108, 109, 150, 164, 
169, 174, 177, 214, 221, 
268, 278, 289, 302, 307, 
342, 394, 40H, 427, 516, 
520, 547, 580, 645, 648 

Khera, goddess, 318 

Kher-aha, 110, 129, 176, 


660, 


84 


b] 


331, 
518, 


182 


226, | 


INDEX 


366, 408, 508, 576, 617, 624, 
663 


| Kher-aha, Aat of, 498, 500 


Kher-aha, Field of, 497 
Kher-aha, Thigh of, 498 


| Kher-ahaut, 45 


Kher-heb, the priest, 45 
Kheri-beq-f, 91, 101, 293 
Kherp sceptre, 29, 185 
Kherserau, 534 

Khesef-at, 476 

Khesef-khemi, 478 
Khesef-hra-asht-kheru, 443, 476 
Khesef-hra-khemiu, 443 


| Khnemet-urt, 607 
| Khnemu, 150, 161, 201, 547 


Khnemu-Heru-hetep, 438 


| Khu, the, Ixiii, lxiv., 59 


Khu, of making come forth, 
593 

Khu, of making perfect the, 303 

Khus, the Seven, 91 

Khus, nine cubits in height, 318, 
486 

Khu-kheper-uru, 534 

Khu-tchet-f, 469 

Knives of slaughter, 105 

Knot, 191, the Great, 179 

Kom Ombos, 161 

Kur‘an, the, xxxi. 


Lappegr, lxxy., 296 

Lady of Life (Isis), 8 

Lake of Akeb, 640 

Lake of Double Fire, 328, 597, 
898 


INDEX 


Lake of Fire, 106, 183, 210, 239, 
378 

Lake of Flame, 595 

Lake of Flowers, 138 

Lake of God, 588 

Lake of Hair, 296 

Lake of Hetep, 320 

Lake of Horus, 61 

Lake of Kaui, 369 

Lake of Kha, 320 

Lake of Kharu, 317 

Lake of Maati, 569 

Lake of making to be at peace, 
294 

Lake of Millions of Years, 398 

Lake of Natron, 91 

Lake of Neb-taui, 320 

Lake of Nefer, 371 

Lake of Nitre, 91 

Lake of Osiris, 351, 642 

Lake of Perfection, 587 

Lake of Qetqet, 320 

Lake of Testes, 13, 17, 65, 514, 
577 

Lake of Uakha, 320, 333 . 

Lake of Unt, 106 

Lake of Urt, 333 

Lake of Urti, 320 

Lake of Weighing in the 
balance, 294 

Land of Life, 64 

Lapis-lazuli, 217, 221, 262, 427, 
599 

Latch of the door, 375 

Leather sandals, white, 277 

Leathers, names of, 299 — 

Leaves of hidden doors, 432 


683 


Leemang, 7, 10, 505, 615 

Lefébure, 380, 631 

Leg of Fire, 370 

Leg of Hapiu, 299 

Leg of Isis, 300 

Leg-bones, 176 

Leg-bones of deceased = leg- 
bones of the living uraei, 183 

Legs of deceased = legs of Nut, 
182 

Letopolis, 42, 105, 117, 126, 128, 
129, 214, 296, 367, 617, 623 

Lieblein, lvii., 665 

Life after death, 49 

Light (Horus), 51 

Light, god of, 198 

Lily of mother-of-emerald, 165 

Lion-god, the, 82, 109, 142, 165, 
169, 173, 195, 207, 213, 215, 
220, 243, 253, 367, 393, 399, 
646 

Lion-gods, 50, 81 

Lips of deceased =lips of An- 
pu, 176, 180 

Living soul, 
into, 265, 272 7 

Lords of Kher-aha, 176, 182 

Lotus, the, 92, 205, 595, 608 

Lotus, transformation into, 263, 
264. 

Luck, the, 23, 25, 33 

Lynx, the, 159, 167, 491 


transformation 


MAA-An-TEF, 300 
Maa-atef-f, 91, 101, 293 
Maaemkerhannefemhru, 101 


684 


Maa-kheru, meaning of, Ixvil., 
10 
Maat, wife of Thoth, daughter 


of Ra, goddess of law, and | 
order, and regularity, 4, 5, 6, | 


8, 13, 14, 17, 19, 29, 30, 61, 64, 
78, 81, 86, 104, 115, 133, 140, 
142, 144, 165, 168, 182, 189, 
192, 227, 238, 262, 298, 340, 
341, 343, 359, 427, 429, 
444, 445, 474, 478, 495, 
516, 537, 540, 569, 645, 
658, 663 

Maat or Maati goddesses, 7, 
412, 435, 657 


Maati, Hall of Double, 357, 360, | 


363 
Maati, Pool of, 97 
Maat-en-khet, 663 
Maa-thet-f, 500 
Maau-Taui, 376 
Mabet Chamber, 368 
Maftet, 159, 491 
Magical words, effect of, 153 
Mahu, the seribe, 229 
Makhent Boat, 135, 624 
Mak stone, 427 
Man-Child, ie., Ra, 11 - 
Mankind created, 13 
Mantis, the praying, 247, 310 
Manu, Mount of Sunset, 4, 6, 


571 

Mariette, 580 
Mariners of Ra, 8, 174 
Marqatha, 543 
Masahairtha, 652 


ail 


INDEX 


Masheru, 314 

Mast, name of, 299 

Matchabet, 299, 350 

Matchat, 343 

Matchet, 105 

Mates, 106 

Matet Boat, 64, 72, 87, 391, 449, 
514 

Mau, 103 

Meat, joints of, 243 

Mecca, 247 

Meh-a-nuti-Ra, 614 

Mehen, 398, 569, 571, 583 

Mehenet, 433 

Mehenit, 567, 568 

Mehi, goddess, 569 

| Mehiu gods, the, 612 

Meh-khebitet-sah-neter, a Cow, 

481 


64, 80, 81, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, | 


Meht-khebitet, 430 
Meh-urt,-91, 99, 176, 237, 239, 
| 355, 633, 634 

| Mekhir, 362, 462 

Members, deification of, 176 

| Memory, Chapter of giving, 136 
| Memphis, 43, 45, 67, 139, 179, 
| 313, 366, 367, 370, 617 

| Mena, 437 

| Menat, 3, 18, 26 

| Mendes, 5, 19, 42, 43, 116, 194, 
336, 355, 616, 632 

Menhu, 111 

| Men-kau-Ra, 151, 211, 221, 607 
| Menkh, 294 

| Menget, 306 

Mentchat, 340, 341 

Menth, 427 


| 


INDEX 


Menthu, 580 

Menthu-hetep, 210 

Mer, 226 

Meri-en-Ptah (Seti IL.), 447 

Mert, city or god, 181, 324, 427 

Mert, name of hull of a boat, 

300 

Merti, 12, 157, 163, 203 

Mes-em-neter, 62, 140, 167, 177, 

217, 236, 348 

Meskhen, the, 23, 25 

Meskhen, the Great, 438 

Meskhen-Menkhet, 438 

Meskhen-Nefert, 438 

Meskhen-Seqehet, 438 

Meskhenet, 23, 25, 33 

Meskhet, 40 

Mes-Ptah, 449, 465 

Mesqen, 203 

Mesqet Chamber, 109, 242, 301, 

600 

Mes-sep, 461 

Mestha, 25, 29, 81, 91, 99, 100, 
101, 118, 119, 299, 300, 336, 
337, 416, 417, 428, 429, 431 

Mestha, speech of, 505 

Metes-hra-ari-she, 443 

Metes-sen, 443 

Mighty One of Terror, 176, 182 

Millions of Years, 97 

Mischief-making, 368 

Mi-shepes, 594 

Mnevis Bull, 299 

Moon, Moon-god, 6, 49, 56, 113, 
262, 406, 646 

Morning Star, 317, 318, 351, 
388 


685 


Mother, power to recognize in 
next world, 194, 640 

Mountain of Amentet, 94 

Mountains, creation of, 13 

Mourners, the Nine, 566 

Mouth, ceremony of opening, 

40, 133, 147, 152, 222 

Mouth, Chapter of opening, 133 

Mouth, Chapter of giving, 130, 

132 

Muhammad, xxxi. 

Muir, Sir W., xxxi. 

Mummy Chamber, Vignette of, 
502 

Murder, 367 

Mut, 540, 541, 548, 627 

Mut-hetep, 79, 82, 503, 504, 505, 
506, 547, 593, 620 

Mut-hetepeth, 595 

Mut-restha, 54, 285, 507, 581 

Mycerinus, xxxiv., lxii., 151, 210, 
221, 607 


Niam, 427 

Naarert, 82 

Na-ari-k, 542 
Na-arerut-f, 121, 122 
Na-arut-f, 97, 101 

Naau, 156 

Nak, fiend, 9, 17, slain, 13 
Name, the, lxiii. 

Name, the Being of unknown, 
177 

Narerut-f, 118 

Natron, 97, 129, 402 
Nau, 494 


686 


Nebeh bird, 199 

Neb-er-tcher, 19, 48, 94, 103, 105, 
106, 108, 116, 124, 169, 251, 
252, 258, 276, 372, 379, 394, 
430, 435, 451, 600, 621, 627, 
629 

Nebes, 162 

Neb-Maat-heri-tep-retui-f, 365 

Neb-pehti-Qesu-menmenet, 365 

Neb-qet, 345 

Nebseni, 52, 53, 61, 93, 102, 104, 
105, 106, 108, 115, 128, 129, 
131, 138, 137, 136." 1490 151, 
164, 165, 173, 188, 190, 207, 
211, 214, 216, 220, 237, 241, 
262, 272, 275, 280, 285, 310, 
311, 315, 318, 319, 320, 324, 
340, 362, 375, 402, 415, 421, 
506, 507, 521, 529, 544, 546, 
581, 582, 584, 585, 586, 587, 
588, 589, 601, 603, 604, 605, 
608, 609 

Nebses, 162 

Nebset, 54 

Nebt, a cloud-fiend, 82, 

397, 410, 424, 445, 508 

Nebt-ankh, 78 

Nebt-taui, Lake of, 320 

Nebt-Unnut, 72 

Neck, 176 

Nefer, Lake of, 371 

Nefer-sent, city of, 513 

Nefer-Tem, 105, 264, 370, 595, 
608 

Nefer-uben-f, 141, 201, 
421, 531, 532, 572, 573, 574, 
577 


INDEX 


Negative Confession, 356, 368- 
371 

Negroes, 540 

Neha-hau, 367 

Neha-hra, 663 

Nehatu, 369 

Neheb-ka, 10, 106, 147, 148 

Neheb-kau, 371, 485, 494, 608 

Neheb-nefert, 371 

Neith, 176, 181, 229, 239, 340, 
341, 343, 344, 488, 463, 537, 
538 

Nekau, a fiend, 541 

Nekau, 466 

Nekek-ur, 204 

Nekh, god, 516 

Nehen, god, 239 

Nehen, 11, 70, 337, 338, 339, 340 

Nekhebet, 70 

Nekht, 15, 152, 161, 162, 

222, 

Nekht, a god, 427 

Nekhtu-Amen, 47, 48, 49, 83, 
161 

Nem-hra, 352 

Nemmes crown, 253, 254, 383, 
386 

Nemu, 104, 511, 518, 514, 515, 
578 

Nentcha, 169 

Nepert, 434 

Nepra, 249 

Nephthys, 10, 17, 18, 23, 25, 29, 
34, 39, 42, 46, 73, 77, 89, 90, 
92, 95, 109, 110, 117, 163, 203, 
213, 218, 220, 331, 387, 388, 
403, 405, 406, 427, 430, 453, 


163, 


~ . INDEX 


493, 503, 532, 580, 583, 618, 
620 

Nerau, 448 

Neri, a doorkeeper, 465 

Nesert, 545 

Nesertet, 545 

Neshem Boat, 45, 438, 462, 530, 

658 

Nesi-Khonsu, 645-656 

Neshmet Boat, 171, 358, 449 

Nesta-neb-asher, 652 

Nesti, gods of, 431 

Net, Chapter of escape from, 

510 

Net, 605; names of parts of, 
B11, 512 : 

Netchet-ab-f, 169 

Netchefet, 433 

Netcheh-netcheh, 91, 101 

Netchses, 453 

Netebit, 434 

Neteka-hra-khesef-atu, 443, 643, 
649, 662, 665 

Neter-khert, 41, 418, 476, 543 

Neter-khentet, 355 

Neter-seh, 436 

Neteru, city of, 433 

Netert-Utchat, 294 

Netet, city of, 594 

Neth, 320 

Neti (or Bati), 174 

Netra, 436 

Nif-ur, city of, 45, 436 

Nif-urt, city of, 398 

Nifu-ur, city of, 387 

Nifu-urtet, city of, 660, 666 

Night of Battle, 104, 116 


687 


Night of carrying out sentence, 
120 

Night of Haker, 119 

Night of him who concealeth 
himself, 121, 122 

Night of making the Tet to 
stand up, 117 

Night of shackling Sebau, 116 

Night of the things of the 

night, 116 

Night of turning up the earth, 

121 

Nile, 19, 34, 70, 138, 206, 

226, 367, 471, 497, 576, 584, 

605 

Nile, the Celestial, 50, 70, 200 

Nile-Flood, 76 

Niles, South and North, 13 

Nine Mourners, 566 

Nine Watchers, 565 

Nit, 438 

Nitre, 97 

Nose of deceased = nose of 

Khenti-khas, 176 

Nose of heaven, 301 

North, Crocodile of, 157 

North, Gods of, 431 

North, Roads of, 432 

North, Rudder of, 430 

North wind, 68; belongs to 

Osiris, 532 

North wind, Eye of, 236 

North wind, Hair of, 236 

Nu, the sky-god, the waterman 
of heaven, 4, 8, 11, 16, 17, 55, 
74, 87, 98, 135, 164, 176, 179, 
230, 252, 261, 271, 273, 274, 


688 


370, 429, 516, 551, 580, 595, 
598, 604, 606, 646, 648 

Nu, the Old Man, 202 

Nu, the Pool of, 167 

Nu, the Papyrus of, 50, 51, 54, 
59, 60, 130, 131, 136, 141, 142, 
147, 152, 153, 158, 159, 160, 
161, 163, 165, 166, 170, 175, 
188, 190, 191, 192, 193, 194, 
195, 198, 199, 200, 208, 
209, 217, 218, 221, 225, 
229, 231, 244, 245, 246, 249, 
250, 258, 263, 265, 268, 270, 
273, 275, 277, 279, 282, 283, 
288, 289, 290, 291, 292, 
297, 302, 303, 305, 307, 308, 
S11 315.314 sein al7, S86; 
338, 341, 344, 345, 346, 347, 
350, 351, 353, 360, 371, 376, 
377, 378, 379, 390, 391, 392, 
397, 400, 401, 402, 403, 404, 
407, 408, 410, 411, 414, 416, 
417, 419, 421, 423, 428, 440, 
444, 445, 464 ff. 480, 481, 484, 
485, 486 ff. 500, 508, 510, 515, 
517, 521, 522, 600, 637, 638, 
639, 643 

Nubia, 247, 537 

Nun, 608 

Nut, the goddess, 4, 8, 11, 16, 
17, 18, 19, 23, 25, 41, 65, 67, 
68, 75, 87, 88, 93, 125, 145, 
154, 169, 170, 176, 179, 180, 
182, 186, 191, 192, 204, 249, 
255, 259, 260, 276, 280, 299, 
312, 316, 387, 400, 401, 403, 
409, 427, 480, 438, 494, 542, 


INDEX 3 


579, 580, 586, 597, 601, 607 
616, 618, 623, 625, 627 


Oar-Rests, 299 

Oars, 64 

Oars, names of, 203 

Old age, prayer to arrive at, 61 

Olive tree in Annu, 374, 603 

On, i.e., Annu, Heliopolis, q.v. 

One, the god, 13, 65, 68, 93, 178, 
179 

One Face, god of, 237-239 

Orbit of the Sun, 64 

Orion, 45, 183, 433, 586 

Osiris, a name given to the 
deceased, see passine 

Osiris, the god, 7, 17, 18, 26, 28, 
29, 30, 41, 45, 46, 58, 62, 65, 
70, 79, 81, 82, 84, 86, 88, 92, 
94, 99, 102, 105, 107, 109, 111, 
112, 114, 116, 125, 132, 142, 
148, 149, 153, 154, 156, 160, 
163, 166, 171, 174, 176, 182, 
184, 200, 207, 209, 210, 212, 
214, 216, 220, 221, 226, 236, 
237, 238, 240, 253, 255, 256, 
257, 269, 272, 278, 276, 280, 
282, 287, 289, 290, 298, 300, 
303, 312, 332, 345, 346, : 
348, 356 ff., 377, 378, 382, 384, 
385, 387, 403, 405, 407, 412, 
417, 418, 419, 420, 426, 427, 
428, 439, 444, 445, 461, 471, 
473, 474, 478, 487, 489, 497, 
498, 503, 505, 518-520, 
558, 556, 565, 566, 568, 572, 


INDEX 


574, 578,580, 589, 598, 599, 
607, 609, 611, 612, 613, 615, 
616, 618, 621, 622, 624, 625, 
630, 631, 638, 642, 658, 660, 
661 

Osiris-Ankhti, 433 

Osiris-Anubis, 558 

Osiris-Atef-ur, 433 

Osiris-Bati-erpit, 433 

Osivis-Horus, 661, 662 

Osiris-Khent-Amenti, 125, 146 

Osivis-neb-er-tcher, 19 

Osiris-Netchesti, 433 

Osiris-Ptah, 433 

Osirif-Saa, 433 

Osiris-Sah, 433 

Osiris-Sekeri, 433 

Osiris-Un-nefer, 18, 
433 

Osiris, Birthday of, 391, 395, 
643 

Osiris, Book of stablishing, 621 

Osiris, Chapter of knowing his 
names, 348 

Osiris, Eye of, 209 

Osiris, Followers of, 127, 251 

Osiris, Heart of, 107 

Osiris, House of, 20 

Osivis in his shrine, 34, 35 

Osiris, Litany of, 66 

Osiris, names and shrines of, 
433-438 

Osiris overcomes his foes, 41 

Osiris, Souls of, 251 

Osiris, Speeches to by Horus, 
589 

Ox of Seb, 375, 376 
VOL IIl. 


19, 122 


> 


689 


PADDLES, 299 

Palette, 25, 34, 289, 290, 597 

Palette of Ani, 39, 90 

Palette of Thoth, 172 

Palm tree, 202, 266, 353 

Palm tree, seven cubits high, 
420 

Pa-nemima, 540 

Pa-netchem, 650, 651, 652, 653, 
656 

Panopolis, 355 

Panther skin, 39, 451 

Papyrus swamp, 339, 524 

Papyrus swamp, City of, 166 

Papyrus swamp, men of, 644 

Paqrer, Papyrus of, 264 

Par, god, 533 

Parehaqa-Kheperu, 539 

Parents, identified in 
world, 323 

Pashakasa, 539 

Paths of the Dead, 129 

Pa-ur, scribe, 447 

Paut of the gods, 33 

Pe, City of, i.e., Buto, 11, 129, 
172, 242, 246, 301, 353, 424, 
433, 530, 576, 579, 592, 594 
623 

Pe, Souls of, 335 

Pectoral, Chapter of giving, 137 

Pehrer, 280 

Pehu, 388 

Pekhat, 540 

Peku, City of, 433 

Pen, 296 

Pen-heseb, 641, 642 

Penti, 192 


next 


M 


690 


Pepi L., xxxv. 

Per-an, 472 

Per-Ausar, 43, 368 

Per-hetch, 472 

Persea tree, 103, 659 

Pert, season. of, 362, 426, 427 

Perti, the divine, 431 

Per-Uatchet, 118, 128 

Pesh-en-kef, 40, 133 

Peshennu, 161 

Pesk-re, 434 

Pet, 126, 128; city of, 118 

Peti, 191 

Pet-she, 434 

Phallus, 176, 533, 541, 557 | 

Phallus of desened= = phallus of | 
Osiris, 182 

Phallus of Osiris, 111 

Phallus of Ra, 95, 98, 111, 288 

Philae, 150, 367 

Phoenicians, 374 

Phoenix, 20 

Pierret, 54 

Pig, 377 

Pig, a black, 337 

Pig, Chapter of repulsing, 162 

Pillars of Horus, 118 

Pillars of Shu, 93, 97, 318 

Pillars of Underworld, 299 

Pillow, Chapter of, 544 

Pilot, his place in the boat, 78 

Plant, 238 

Planks of boat, names of, 300 

Ploughing, Festival of, in Tattu, 
128, 129 

Pool of Double Fire, 276 

Pool of Fire, 132, 135 


INDEX 


Pool of Flame, 296 

Pool of Maati, 97 

Pool of Nu, 167 

Pool of Right and Truth, 374 
Pool of South, 374 


. Pool of Turquoise, 170 


Post, Upper, name of, 299 
Potter’s wheel, 150 
Praises of Ra, 610-614 
Prayers for the Dead, 22 


Princes, transformation into, 
259 

Ptah, 43, 51, 52, 53, 60, 133, 139, 
150, 176, 182, 212, 265, 266, 
313, 319, 460, 472, 505, 5086, 
516, 545, 582, 601, 602, 603, 
604, 605, 659 

Ptah-mes, 384, 385, 386 

Ptah-Seker, 503, 507 

Ptah-Seker-Tem, 67 

Ptah-Sekri, 578 

Ptah of the South Wall, 577, 


579, 581, 582 
Ptah- Tanen 26 
Punishment, 22 
Punt, 12, 74 
Purification, place of, 101 
Purity, 368 
Pylons, the Twenty-One, 20 
Pylons of House of Osiris, 
Chapters of, 448-462, 464 ff. 
Pyvamid Texts, xxxivy. ff. 


(QJA-HA-HETEP, 491 
Qalu, 500 


Qebhsennuf, 25, 29, 81, 91, 99, 


INDEX 


100, 101, 300, 337, 338, 340, 
416, 417, 428, 429, 431, 532; 
speech of, 505 

Qebhu, 259 

Qebti (Coptos) 578 

Qefennu, 434 

Qem-ur, 212, 279, 358 

Qem-ur-she, 220 

Qemt, 424, 538 

Qemt, City of, 437 

Qenna, Papyrus of, 7, 9, 10, 11, 
12, 30, 75, 81, 83, 89, 505, 615 

Qenqenet-nebt, 320 

Qenqentet, 334 

Qerau, 111 


Qerert, the Xth, 559 ; the XIth, | 


562 ; the XIIth, 569 
Qerti, 383, 384, 429, 438 
Qerti of Abu (Elephantine) 498 
Qerti, the gods of, 381 
Qerti, the Two, 367, 663, 664 
Qetetbu, 327 
Qetqet, Lake of, 320 


Ra, the Sun god, 4, 41, 42, 49, 
50, 51, 52, 59, 60, 61, 63, 64, 
65, 67, 69, 71, 73, 75, 78, 79, 
82, 83, 87, 88, 92, 93, 94, 97, 
98, 102, 104, 108, 109, 116, 
122, 124, 125, 134, 135, 157, 
158, 164, 165, 166, 167, 168, 
169, 170, 176, 177, 186, 
191, 196, 207, 209, 210, 212, 
215, 216, 225, 226, 227, 229, 
230, 237, 238, § 249, 
263, 266, 269, 275, 4 


289, | 


293, 294, 298, : 
304, 306, 307, 
315, 316, 318, 333, 
339, 340, 341, 
379, 381, 
390, 
398, 400, 401, 
403, 405, 406, 407, 
411, 412, 413, 415, 422, 
426, 427, 429, 
446, 462, 474, 480, 
486, 487, 489, 4 
516, 
46, 547, 548, 55 
556, 561, 566, 57 
575, 579, 582, 58: 
587, 589, 595, 5 

608, 
616, 
628, 
643, 659, 660, 661, 


Ra, Boat of, 286 

Ra, Chapter of living nigh unto, 
397 

Ra-Harmachis, 8, 86, 317, 429, 
499 

Ra-Heru-khuti, 8, 86, 317, 429, 
486, 499 

Ra-er-Neheh, 427 

Ra, hymns to, 3, 6, 7, 10, 12, 15 

Ra-Khepera, 137 

Ra-Osiris, 393 

Ra, Papyrus of, 170 

Ra, Right Eye of, 98 

Ra-Tem, 79, 81, 82, 86, 106, 428 

Ra, Temple at Annu, 5 


692 


Raging One, 430 

Ram, 291, 298 

Ram, adoration of, 57 

Ram, Lord of Tattu, 170 

Ram, the Divine, 43 

Rameses IV. (Ra-meses-meri- 
Amen- Ra-heq-Maat), 381, 
382, 383 

Ravisher, 557 

Reader, the, 40, 45 

Re-aa-urt, 220 

Red Crown, the double, 174 

Red fowl, 154 

Red grain, 194 

Red Lands, 620 

Red Ones, 178 

Red Sea, xix. 

Reed-pen, 25 

Rehenenet, 433 

Re-hent, 231, 232 

Rehu, 92, 110 

Rehui, the Two, 475 

Reins, 176, 182 

Re-Iukasa, 542 

Rekes, 168 

Rekht, the Two, 42, 126, 163 

Rekhti, the two lands of, 119, 
128, 129 

Rekhti-merti-neb-Maati, 360 

Remu, city of, 339 

Remu, iand of, 339 

Remrem, god, 246 

Renenet, 23, 25, 33, 526 

Rennutet, 579 

Rere (2), 43 

Rerei, 543 

Rerek serpent, 158, 167, 490, 491 


INDEX 


Rereti, 663 

Rertu-nifu, 436 

Res-ab, 448 

Resenet, 433 

Res-hra, 443 

Resekhait, 438 

Re-statet, 46 

Re-stau, 42, 43, 48, 51, 82, 91, 
97, 112, 114, 123, 126, 129, 
132, 215, 219, 321, 345, 358, 
367, 373, 379, 380, 433, 434, 
444, 462, 473, 474, 475, 495, 
553, 589, 617, 660, 663 

Re-stau, Chapters of, 345-348 

Resu, 433, 

Resurrection of the body, 150, 
518-520 

Resurrection of Osiris, 116 

Resurrection, the general, 22 

Retasashaka, 543 

Revolt, Children of, 103 

Ring of ankham flowers, 62 

River, name of, 300 

River-banks, names of, 300 

River without fish and serpents, 
321 

Roads of East, North, South, 
and West, 432 

Robbery, 360 

Rope, 299 

Rowlocks, 64 

Rudder, 299 

Rudder, names of, 203, 300 

Rudder of the East, 211, 218, 
430 

Rudder of the North, 430 

Rudder of the South, 430 


\ ray 
ec N 


INDEX 


Rudder of the West, 430 

Rudders, the Four, names of, 
482, 483 

Ruddy Beings, the, 430 

Ruddy One, 609, 623 

Runner, name of Ra, 65 


Sa, the god, 23, 25, 98, 103, 333, 

840, 344, 413, 57 
Sa garment, 333 

Saa-Amenti-Ra, 595 

Saa, city of, 434 

Saa, god, 593 

Saau-ur, 595 

Saa-urt, 595 

Sabes, 443 

Sacrilege, 361, 367 

Saffron cakes, 109 

Sah, god, 613 

Sah gods, the Twelve, 213 

Sah, i.e. Orion, 433, 586 

Sahu, ie. Orion, 45 

Sahu,or spiritual body, |xiv.,mak- 
ing the s. to enter the Tuat, 47 

Sahu who reap wheat, 321 

Sahu of Abtu, 355 

Sahu of Annu, 355 

Sahu of Apu, 355 

Sahu of Qem-ur, 358 

Sahu of Sennu, 355 

Sahu of Suten-henen, 355 

Sahu of Tattu, 355 

Sail, 164, 165, 197, 198, 202 

Sail, the name of, 299 

Sailor, name of, 300 

Sailors of Ra, 374 


) 
5 


693 


Sais, 176, 181, 370, 537 

Sam flowers, 160 

Samait goddesses, the Two, 220 

Sa-mer-f, 114, 451 

Samti, 454 

Sand, 625 

Sand, collar of, 419 

Sandals, 354, 575, 641 

Sandals of white leather, 377 

Sapti, 437 

Saqenaqat, 540 

Sariu gods, 220 

Sasaqbubu, 543 

Sata, transformation into, 277, 
278 

Satet, 358 

Sati, 339, 416 

Sati-temui, a serpent 70 cubits 
long, 488 

Satiu, 370 

Sau, city of, 370, 871, 462, 463, 
537, 642 

Sau, the Lower, 433 

Sau, the Upper, 434 

Scalding, Chapter of avoiding, 
210 

Scales, 607, and see Balance 

Scarab, 222 

Scarab of basalt, 147 

Scarab of green stone, 151, 152 

Sceptre, land of, 175 

Sceptre of flint, 374 

Scorn, to think s. of god of city, 
371 

Scorpion, 133, 168, 176, 275 

Seasons, 43 

Seb, the god, 5, 17, 18, 23, 25, 61 


694 ; INDEX 


93, 103, 108, 125, 127, 138, 145, 
154, 158, 169, 170, 173, 196, 
226, 231, 232, 252, 267, 293, 
298, 375, 387, 403, 405, 409, 
426, 430, 508, 513, 525, 552, 
573, 574, 575, 580, 593, 603, 
618, 626, 627, 658, 665 

Seba, a fiend, 11, 82, 125 

Sebaku, god, 409 

Sebau fiends, 5, 6, 41, 42, 65, 
100, 116, 128 

Sebek, 239, 314, 315, 316, 338, 
339, 375, 511, 580 

Seb-ur, 133 

Seer of Millions of Years, 177 

Sef, Yesterday, 90 

Sefekh-aabui, 201 

Seheptet, 310 

Sehetep-taui, 354 

Sehtet, 433 

Seker, the god, 19, 43, 69, 108, 
244, 511, 585, 666 

Seker-Osiris, 633 

Sekhat-Heru, 576 

Sekhem, the, 1xii. 

Sekhem, 42, 105, 117, 118, 126, 
128, 129, 214, 269, 276, 279, 
296, 367, 509, 576, 617, 623, 
663 

Sekhen-ur, 455, 470 

Sekher-At, 490 

Sekh-er-remu, a god, 499 

Sekhet, 69, 134, 139, 176, 182, 200, 
229, 463, 540, 594, 610, 660 

Sekhet-Aaru, Sekhet - Aarru, 
Sekhet-Aanru, 46, 76, 97, 207, 
243, 277, 301, 302,7313, 318, 


~ Sekhet-Aanru, 


324, 486, 569, 570, 592, 605, 
642, 655 
Sekhet-Aanre, Chapters of, pall 
448, 462 
Sekhet-Aanreru, 
» 464 


Chapters of, 


Fourteen Aats 
of, 485-500 

Sekhet-Aarru, the 1st Aat, 499 

Sekhet-Bast-Ra, 539 

Sekhet-Hetep, Ixix., 
243, 249, 413, 445, 
874, 605, 641, 657 

Sekhet-Hetep, Bight of, 548 

Sekhet-Hetepet, 76, 319 

Sekhet-Hetepet, Chapters of, 324 

Sekhet-Hetepet, description of, 
320 ff. 

Sekhet-Hetepu, 20, 26 

Sekhet-Sanehem, 657 

Sekhet-Sasa, 296 

Sekhet-neheh, 254 

Sekhemet-em-tesu-sen, 478 

Sekhemet-ren-s-em-abet-s, 482 

Sekhet-hra-asht-aru, 440, 473 

Sek-hra, 412 

Sekhti-Hetep, 495 

Sekri, 303, 513, 643 © 

Seksek, 160 

Sektet Boat, 6, 8, 13, 14, 17, 45, 
64,-65, 72, 74, 76, 78, 80, 82, 
85, 87, 163, 196, 249, 293, 300, 
308, 355, 391, 395, 431, 436 
439, 449, 503, 507, 514, 632 

Selket, 168 

Semamti, 468 

Semetu, 443, 471 


114, 148, 
569, 570, 


INDEX 


Semketet Boat, 293 

Sem priest, 39, 63, 133, 136, 343 

Semti, xxxvi., 217, 221, 396 

Senhaparekana, 537 

Senhaqareha, 537 

Senk, god, 555 

Senket, 339 

Sennu, 355 

Senseneb, xxxiii. 

Senti-Ra, 342 

Sepa, 100 

Sepes, Tree of, 608 

Sept, 105, 156, 495, 500, 594 

Septet, 306, 333 

Sepulchral meals, 5 

Seqet-hra, 443, 474 

Serat-beqet, 602 

Seres-hra, 475 

Seres-tepu, 476 

Serpent-Fiend, 17 

Serpent-Fiend, spearing of, 58 

Serpent on legs, 535 

Serpents, Chapters protective 
against, 158, 160 

Serq, 599 

Serqet, 157, 176, 438 

Servants, ill-treatment of, 361 

Seshet, 436 

Seshet Chamber, 216 

Sesheta, 201, 508 

Sesheta-Ausar, 553 

Seshetet goddess, 575 

Set, the Fiend, 17, 18, 19, 51,57, 
109, 116, 118, 121, 125, 133, 
142, 165, 169, 171, 181, 191, 
205, 207, 216, 246, 276, 315, 
324, 327, 355, 857, 422,. 450, 


455, 503, 538, 576, 580, 
598, 605, 642 

Set, members of, 98 

Set, a place, 290 

Set-Amentet, 94 

Set-Tchesert, 47 

Setek, a god, 553 

Setem-ansi-f, 342 

Setet, 660 

Setil.,15 

Seti IL., 447 

Seven Arits, 446 

Seven Cows and their Bull, 481 

Seven Spirits, 100, 101, 239 

Seven Uraei, 269 

Shabti-figure, 53, 505 

Shabu, 476 

Shade or shadow, Ix., 284, 287 

Shades, Eater of, 367 

Shaka-Amen-Shakanasa, 537 

Shapu-neter-ari-ka, 537 

Sharei-sharei-shapu - neter-ari- 
ka, 537 

Share-share-khet, 537 

Shareshathakatha, 543 

Shat, god, 291 

Shau, City of, 435 

Shenat-pet-utheset-neter, 482 

Shenit, the, 25, 151 

Sheniu Chamber, the, 105, 106 

Shenmu, city of, 530 

Shennu, 161, 435 

Shentet tree, 358 

Shenthit, 438 

Sherem, god, 554 

Sheret-Amsu, 62, 124, 127, 146, 
463, 537, 543 


696 


Shes-khentet, 594 

Sheta, goddess, 553 

Shetet-pet, 607 

Shoulder, the right, 174 

Shoulder of Osiris, the Left, 42 

Shoulders of deceased = shoul- 
ders of the Utchat, 181 

Shu, 18, 22, 23, 50, 97, 103, 104, 
109, 116, 122, 133, 134, 158, 
160, 187, 214, 230, 255, 282, 
283, 295, 302, 318, 324, 327 
331, 333, 341, 343, 359, 37 
391, 395, 397, 403, 405, 42 
429, 487, 507, 517, 530, 580, 
604, 621, 626, 654, 655, 658, 
660, 666 

Shu, Blossoms of, 215, 220 

Shu, Pillars of, 93 

Silence, 65 

Silver, ring of, 151 

Sin, 153 

Sisters, the Two, 163 

Sistrum, 3 

Six, Festival of, 42, 408, 643, 666 

Skin of animal in shrine of 
Osiris, 29 

Slander, 368 

Slaughterings, 173 

Smam, the Bull, 271 

Smamet, the Cow, 602 

Smam-ur, 108 

Sman, the Lake, 334. 

Snake-god, 321 

Snakes in Underworld, 159 

Socket of door, 375 

Sodomy, 370 

Somaliland, 12, 74 


INDEX 


Soul, Chapters protective of 
206, 284 

Soul in Suten-henen, 117 

Soul in Tattu, 68 

Soul of Everlastingness, 68 

Soul of Osiris, 102 

Soul of Ra, 79, 92, 102, 273 

Soul of Shu, 103 

Soul of souls, 83 

Soul of Tefnut, 103 

Soul of the earth, 563 

Soul, Temple of, 5 

Soul, the, lix. 

Soul, the, i.e. Osiris, 57 

Soul, the Divine, 52, 284 

Soul, the Divine double, 102 

Soul, the everliving, 417 

Soul, the form of, 283, 285 

Soul, the hidden, 211, 212 

Soul, the mighty, 256 

Soul, union with body, 279-281 

Soul with Two Eyes, 647 

Souls of Amentéet, 85 

Souls of Annu, 11, 134, 293, 
308, 342, 343, 586, 587 

Souls of Khemennu, 340, 341 
343 

Souls of Nekhen, 338, 340 

Souls of Osiris, 251 

Souls of Pe, 335, 336, 337, 424 

Souls of Ra, 612 

Souls of Tep, 424 

Souls of the East, 17, 80, 314, 
317, 487 

Souls of the West, 17, 314, 315 

Sothis, 306, 333, 495, 500, 594 

South, Crocodile of, 156 


? 


INDEX 


South, gods of, 431 

South, roads of, 432 

South, Rudder of, 430 

South, Wind of, 155, 532 

Spade in Suten-henen, 43 

Spirit, the, 1xi. 

Spirits, twelve cubits high, 
4,601,200, or 4,601,020, in 
number, 213, 219 

Sprout of Nu, 129 

Sta, a god, 554 

Staff of Ani, 39 

Staircase, the Great, 567 

Staircase of Sebaku, 409 

Standard of Ap-uat, 299 

Star, the Morning, 61 

Stars, 12, 64, 296 

Steps, the God on the, xxxvi., 
132 

Steering, 350 

Still-Heart, the, 42, 448, 466, 
468, 521, 571, 621 

Stone of Right and Truth, 657 

Sun, the, 6, 113 

Sunrise, the, 43, 73, 75, 77 

Sunset, the, 81 

Sukati, a god, 544 

Sunnu, 433 

Sut, 262, 359 

Suten-henen, 43, 69, 93, 96, 107, 
109, 355, 362, 367, 387, 417, 
632 

Suti, 57, 108, 143, 176, 191, 198, 
226, 256, 257, 269, 282, 292, 
299, 315, 337, 405, 426, 494, 
642 5 

Sutimes, Papyrus, 52, 631 


697 


Swallow, transformation into, 
275 

Sycamore tree, 194, 204, 208, 
216, 220, 294, 640 

Sycamore, City of, 369 

Sycamores, Two s. of turquoise, 
318 


4 


TaseEt of crystal, 374, 375 

Ta-ankhtet, 436 

Ta-hennu-Tehuti, 649, 650, 656 

Ta-her-sta-nef, 19 

Tait, goddess, 266, 585 

Taiti, 434 

Ta-Kensetet, 540 

Takhert-p-uru-abt, 665 

Ta-mera, 357, 372 

Ta-mes-tchetta, 427 

Tanenet, 49, 109, 434 

Ta-qebh, 205 

Tar fiend, 541 

Ta-sekri, 435 

Ta-she, 368 

Tashenatit, 657, 658, 659, 660, 
661, 662, 663 

Tatau, 201 

Ta-tchesert, Ta-tchesertet, 20, 
45, 70, 76, 463, 504, 558, 565, 
589, 615, 618, 622, 625, 628, 
633, 661 

Ta-tiunen, 612 

Tattu, 5,19, 20, 42, 43, 46, 48, 
68, 69, 86, 92, 102,-116, 117, 
121, 126, 128, 129, 154, 160, 
166, 194, 201, 236, 243, 251, 

252, 255, 257, 303, 353, 355, 


698 


387, 388, 436, 454, 616, 640, 
660, 661, 666 

Tattu, divine double Soul in, 
103 

Tattu, gods of, 117 

Tattu, souls of Osiris and Ra 
meet in, 102 

Tatunen, 5, 80, 271 

Ta-ur, gods of, 171 

Tcha, 169 

Tchaui-nefer, 657 

Tchatcha, the, 25, 150 

Tchefau, a boat, 321 

Tchefau food, 76 

Tchefet, city of, 370 

Tchefet, region of, 333 

Tchentch, 612 

Tchesef, 469 

Tchesert, 97, 264, 334, 554 

Tchetetfet, 320 

Tchetta, 427 

Teb-her-kehaat, 443 

Teb-hra-ha-kheft, 477 

Tebti, 370 

Tebu, land of, 274 

Teeth of deceased =teeth of 
Serqet, 176, 180 

Teeth, shining, 367 

Tefnet, 574 

Tefnut, 18, 22, 50, 103, 116, 134, 

, 841, 343, 391, 403, 405, 412, 
427, 429, 580 

Tehen, 461 

Tehent, 549 

Tehuti-Hapi, 207 

Tekem, 242 

Tem, Lemmu, Tau. 710322503, 


INDEX 


79, 84, 85, 93 
109, 110, 116, 
143, 157, 164, 
197, 199, 201, 
256, 258, 259, 
300, 314, 316, 


50, 55, 60, 65, 
94, 96, 97, 98, 
124, 125, 133, 
166, 169, 173, 
221, 242, 252, 
266, 283, 289, 
340, 343, 344, 351, 398, 
412, 426, 429, 461, 485, 
503, 511, 515, 518, 530, 
578, 580, 593, 594, 596, 597, 
598, 611, 612, 616, 623, 625, 
626, 643, 658 

Tem, Eye of, 80 

Temanu, 133 

Tem-Heru-Khuti (Temu-Har- 
machis), 8, 15, 64, 87 

Tem in the Sun-disk, 92 

Tem-Khepera, 134, 429 

Tem-Sep, 370 

Temple of Aged One, 5, 51 

Temple of Anpu, 203 

Temple of Flame, 431 

Temple of North and South, 53 

Temple of Kas, 430 

Temple of Osiris, 43 

Temple of Ptah, 52, 53 

Temple of Ra at Annu, 5 

Temple of Soul, 5 

Ten Companies of 
chiefs, 124 

Ten (Semti), xxxiv. 

Tena, 213 

Tenait, 259 

Tenat festival, 42 

Tenemit, 574 

Teni (This), 119, 308, 423 

Tenpu, 159 


sovereign 


Lm, 


INDEX 


Tep, 129, 172, 242, 424, 576, 579 

Tept, 118, 126 

Tep-tu-f, 358 

Tepu, 128, 246, 301, 434, 592, 
623 

Terrible One, the, 48 

Tesher, god, 436, 608 

Tesher-maa, 91 

Tesher-maati-ami-het-Anes, 101 

Teshert Crown, 487 

Tesheru-gods, 293 

Tesh-tesh, 42 

Tes-tes, Lake of, 13, 17, 65, 514, 
577 

Tet, the, 73, 77, 116, 120, 126, 
303, 304, 389, 666 

Tet of crystal, 419 

Tet, of gold, 521 

Tet of Ra, 419 

Tet, the double, 128 

Tet, the speech of, 504 

Tettet, 637 

Tetteti, 42 

Thanasa-Thanasa, 543 

Thebes, 3, 18, 79, 359, 447, 580, 
665, 666 

Theft, 367 

Thehennu, 417 

Thekem, 301 

Thekshare-A men-Rerethi, 543 

Then, tree, 600 


Thena, father of Nebseni, 173, 


479, 507, 581 
Thenna, 240 
Thent-men-nefer, 403 
Thent-nubt, 665 
Thet-em-aua, 300 


699 


Thigh, 100, 154, 392, 393, 395 

Thigh, gods of, 431 

Thigh in Great Lake, 295 

Thigh of heaven, 245 

Thigh of Isis, 300 

Thigh of Kher-Aha, 493 

Thigh of Nemu, 511 

Thigh of Nut, 409 

Thigh of Tem, 518 

Thigh of the Lake, 495 

This, 119 

Thoth 4; 5, 6) 23, 2 
33, 34, 41, 42, 56, 60, 72, 78, 
82, 98, 100, 115, 116, 117, 119, 
120, 121, 128, 129, 133, 
149, 150, 154, 177, 194, 205, 
233, 237, 238, 246, 262, 269, 
281, 289, 290.292, 302, 304, 

308, 321, 398, 340, 341 

343, 344, 352, 366, 376, 385, 

392, 394, 397, 405, 407, 

1, 445, 452, 478, 489, 503 

529, 530, 531, 546, 576, 

587, 596, 604, 605, 607, 

618, 621, 622, 623, 
625, 629, 639, 641, 659 

Thoth, Chapter of being nigh 
unto, 291, 292 

Thoth, festival of, 643 

Thothmes ITI. and the CLIVth 
Chapter, liv. 

Throat of deceased = throat of 
Mert, 181 

Throat of Mestha, 299 

Throne, 188, 189 

Throne of Osiris set in water, 
B4 


700 


Throne, of receiving a ¢. in 
Heliopolis, 245 

Thunder, 169, 291 

Thunder cloud, 168 

Thuthu, 3, 18, 22, 66, 92, 202, 
473 

Tile, 377 

Time, 598 

To-day, ic. Ra, 94, 178, 211, 
218, 424 ' 

Todtenbuch, Edition by Lepsius 
quoted or referred to, 62, 68, 
124, 130, 136, 137, 140, 142, 
143, 146, 150, 152, 153, 158, 
160, 163, 166, 173, 175, 188, 
190, 192, 193, 195, 196, 205, 
208-227, 231, 243, 244, 245, 
246, 247, 263, 281, 288, 293, 
994.5302 305.2307. 310, 8313, 
314, 317, 340, 344, 349, 350, 
351, 355, 380, 387, 390, 396, 
397, 406, 408, 421, 425, 428, 
435, 447, 508, 514, 517, 523, 
525, 526, 530, 532, 533, 535, 
539, 540, 542 

Todtenbuch, Edition by Naville, 
47, 62, 63, 83, 86, 136, 137, 
142, 144, 148, 149, 151, 158, 
160, 161, 163, 166, 167, 170 
173, 175, 198, 199, 200, 201 
208, 225, 229, 231, 236, 237, 
240, 246, 254, 258, 281, 28 
988, 304, 307, 317, 348, 35 
361, 380, 384, 390, 399, 40 
421, 428, 447, 470, 531, 57 
610, 617, 630, 634 

Tomb, Chapter of opening, 285 


INDEX 


To-morrow, 211 

Tortoise, 269, 531, 532 

Torture, Chamber of, 273 

Transformation into hawk of 
gold, 248; into the divine 
hawk, 250; into the chief of 
sovereign princes, 259; into 
the god of light, 261 ; into the 
lotus, 263, 264; into Ptah, 
265; into the Bennu, 268 ; 
into the heron, 271; into the 
living soul, 272; into the 
swallow, 275; into the ser- 
pent, 277; into the crocodile, 
278 

Transformations, 129, 221, 610, 
615 

Transformations, heart of, 147 

Traveller, a name of Ra, 14 

Trayeller, i.e., the sailor, 300 

Traveller of Millions of Years, 97 

Tree of Sepes, 608 

Truth, Hall of double, 550 

Tuamautef, 25, 29, 81, 91, 99, 
100, 101, 300, 337, 338, 340, 
416, 417, 428, 429, 431 

Tuamautef, speech of, 505 

Tuat, the, 16, 45, 47, 49, 57, 59, 


72, 79, 82, 83, 84, 87, 88, 97, 
132, 145, 187, 211, 212, 214, 
215, 217, 218, 220, 221, 255, 
257, 273, 323, 432, 543, 553, 
555, 558, 559, 560, 561, 562, 
566, 5 613, 


66, 569, 593, 611, 612, 
614, 615, 617, 618, 619, 622, 
643, 646, 658, 659, 661, 662, 


nad eit St endl 


—— 


eo 
bs 
\ ‘ 


INDEX 


Tuau = To-day, 90 
Tun-hat, 2, 443 

Tun-tet, 133 

Turquoise, 78 
Turquoise, Pool of, 170 
Turtle, 269 

Tutef, name of, 153 
Twin-gods, 102, 238, 239 


Ua, goddess, 578 

Uaa, Papyrus of, Sem 

Uaau, 448 

Uak Feival 577, 643 

Uakh, Lake of, 333 

Uakha, Lake of, 320 

Uamenti, 368 

Uart-ent-mu, 496 

Uatch of emerald, Chapter of, 
526, 529 

Uatch goddesses, 583 

Uatchet, 92, 110, 111, 181, 229, 
409, 413, 610 

Uatchet-ura, 91 

Uatch-Maati, 157 

Ubes-hra-per-em-khet-khet, 101 

Uhem-hra, 352 

Uka festival, 389, 661 

Un, 435 

Unas, 606, 607 

Unas, Pyramid of, 593, 601 

Unen-em-hetep, 332, 333 

Unes, city of, 369 

Unguents, 39 

Un-hat, 474 


Un-nefer, 18, 19, 29, 46, .67, 68, 
112, 122, 125, 177,-269, 321, 


"70% 


360, 387, 396, 409, 433, 461, 

484, 523, 589, 611, 615, ne 

621, 623, 624, 625, 629, 630: 
Un-nefer Ra, 82 


271, 297, 418 

Urnne goddess, 418 
Int, 495, 496, 500 
Jnt, Lake of, 106 coe 


Titi, 68, 409 
Ur, 157, 165 : 
Uraei, the Living, 183, 377 + 7:- 


Ur-arit-s, 308 Ao Ri. 


Ur-at, 663 

Ureret Crown, 60, 68, 107, 
262, 345, 405, 429, 475, 485,. 
523, 611, 616, 623 oeest 

Ur-heka instrument, 39 : 

Ur-hekau, 130, 133, 595 toes” 

(Dineen GA GOS 

Urit, 369 : 

Ur-pehi-f, 446 

Ur-ma, 342 

Ur-maat-f, 343 

Ur-mertu-s-teshert-sheni, 481 

Urt, 398 

Urti, Lake of, 320 

Ur-urti, 213 

Usekh-hra, 142 

Usekh-nemtet, 662 

User-ba, 226 

User-hat, 291 

Usert, Lake of, 334 

Usertsen, Xxxv. 

Uset, 474 

Ushabti Figure, 53 


eseove 


ta (Her ene! 52, 56, 20 . 


U 

U eee 
Unth, 370 Las 

U 


» 90908 


cesses o0e 


=o “Ut-meht (Northern Oasis), 437 
. -Utzreset (Southern Oasis), 436 

Sx =) "thi, 301 

eee: “Un-pek, 437 


_,[tchaabet, 197 
< Véchat, 64, 69, 91, 96, 98, 115, 
“22177, 178, 182, 216, 239, 427, 
“co «428, 638 
' Utchat, Chapter of bringing, 546 
cc e , - Utchat, the full, 362, 426 
© [Utchats,ie., the Sun and Moon, 
2 “ee"-G4, 117, 423, 535 


: _Utvhatet, 426 
_Utch-re, 461 


VENGEANCE on the god, 370 


702 


Usr-Maat - Ra - setep-en-Amen, 
381, 382, 383 


Utchats on legs, 535 


.Utent, 220 


“Vitilence, 370 
Vulture of gold, Chapter of, 523 


eceo 


WAILING women, 39, 42 

Watcher, 106, 350 

Watchers, 105, 108, 109 

Watchers, the Nine, 565 

Water, Chapter of mastery over, 
200 

Water, Chapter of 
over, 203 

Water, fouling of, 370 

Wax, 242 


dominion 


| 


Wax figure of Apep, 55 


INDEX 


Weigher of words, 611 

Weighing words, 41 

West, Crocodile of, 156 

West, Gods of, 314, 431 

West, Roads of, 432 

West, Rudder of, 430 

West, Souls of, 17, 314, 315 

West, Wind of, 154, 532 

Whip, 19 

Wheat, 242, 302 

Wheat five cubits high, 318, 
486 

White Crown, 19, 175 

Wig, whitened, 29 


| Wind, the North, 300 


Winds, the Four Doors of, 531, 
5382 

Wine, 302, 378, 410 

Wolves, 135, 154 

Words of power, Chapter of 
bringing, 134 

Work in the Underworld, 52, 
53 

World, three divisions of, 45 

Worms in Amentet, 48 

Wrath, 368 

Writing, goddess of, 201 

Writing reed, 621 


YESTERDAY = Osiris, 94, 
178, 211, 218, 262, 424 
Yesterday, Chapter of advanc- 
ing from, 608 
Young Man,.274 


1775 


. LONDON : 
PRINTED BY GILBERT AND RIVINGTON, LIMITED, 
ST. JOHN’S HOUSE, CLERKENWELL, B.C. 


« A - 
a 
+ 
— 
ee 
- 
— 
- i 
- a 
. 
‘ - = 
—_—_— 
» -_ 
rr — 


Catalogue of Publications 


of the 


Open Court Publishing Company 


Chicago, Monon Building, 324 Dearborn St. 


London, Kegan Paul, Trench, Triibner & Co. 


SUNDARA ROW, T. 
GEOMETRICAL EXERCISES IN PAPER-FOLDING. 
With Half-Tones from Photographs of Exercises. Pages, x + 148. 
Cloth, $1.00 net (4s. 6d. net). 


GORE, E. D: 
THE PRIMARY FACTORS OF ORGANIC EVOLUTION, 
rz1cuts. Pp. xvi, 547. Cloth, $2.00 (ros.). 


MULLER, F. MAX. 
THREE INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON THE SCIENCE OF 
THOUGHT. 
128 pages. Cloth, 75c (3s. 6d.). 


THREE LECTURES ON THE SCIENCE OF LANGUAGE. 
112 pages. 2nd Edition. Cloth, 75c (3s. 6d.). 


ROMANES, GEORGE JOHN. 
DARWIN AND AFTER DARWIN. 
Three Vols., $4.00. Singly, as follows: 
i. THE DARWINIAN THEORY. 460 pages. 125 illustrations. Cloth, $2.00. 
2. Post-DARWINIAN QuESTIONS. Heredity and Utility. Pp. 338. $1.50. 
3. Post-DarWINIAN Questions. Isolation and Physiological Selection. 
Pp. 181. $1.00. 


AN EXAMINATION OF WEISMANNISM. 
236 pages. Cloth, $1.00, 


THOUGHTS ON RELIGION. 
Third Edition, Pages, 184. Cloth, gilt top, $1.25. 


SHUTE, DR. D. KERFOOT. 
FIRST BOOK IN ORGANIC EVOLUTION. 
g colored plates, 39 cuts. Pp. xvi+285. Price, $2.00 (7s. 6d.). 


MACH, ERNST. 
THE SCIENCE OF MECHANICS, 
Trans. by T. J. McCormack. 2nded, 250cuts. 540 pages, $1.75 net 
(7s. 6d.). 


POPULAR SCIENTIFIC LECTURES. 
Third Edition. 415 pages. 59 cuts. Cloth, gilt top. $1.50 (7s. 6d.), 


THE ANALYSIS OF THE SENSATIONS. 
Pp. 208. 37 cuts. Cloth, $1.25 (6s. 6d.). 


LAGRANGE, JOSEPH LOUIS. 
LECTURES ON ELEMENTARY MATHEMATICS, 
With portrait of the author. Pp. 172. Price, $1 00 (5s.). 


DE MORGAN, AUGUSTUS. 
ON THE STUDY AND DIFFICULTIES OF MATHEMATICS. 
New Reprint edition with notes. Pp. viii+288. Cloth, $1.25 (5s.). 


ELEMENTARY ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE DIFFERENTIAL AND 
INTEGRAL CALCULUS. 
New reprint edition. Price, $1.00 (5s.). 


FINK, KARL. 
A BRIEF HISTORY OF MATHEMATICS. ' 
Trans. by W. W. Beman and D. E. Smith. Pp., 333. Cloth, $1.50 (5s.6d.). 


SCHUBERT, HERMANN. 
MATHEMATICAL ESSAYS AND RECREATIONS. 
Pp. 149. Cuts, 37. Cloth, 75¢ (3s. 6d.). 


HUC AND GABET, MM. 
TRAVELS IN TARTAR\, THIBET AND CHINA. 
roo engravings. Pp 28+ 660. 2 vols, $2.00 (10s.). One vol., $1.25 (5s.). 


CARUS, PAUL. 
THE HISTORY OF THE DEVIL, AND THE IDEA OF EVIL. 
311 Illustrations. Pages, 500. Price, $6.00 (30s.). 
THE CROWN OF THORNS. 
A Story of the Time of Christ. Illustrated. Pages, 73. Cloth, 75¢ 
net (3s, 6d, net), 
EROS AND PSYCHE. 
After Apuleius. Illustrations by Paul Thumann. Pp. 125. Cl., $1.50 (6s.). 
WHENCE AND WHITHER? 
An Inquiry into the Nature of the Soul. 196 pages. Cloth, 75c (3s. 6d.). 
THE ETHICAL PROBLEM. 
Second edition, revised and enlarged. 351 pages. Cloth, $1.25 (6s. 6d.). 
FUNDAMENTAL PROBLEMS. 
Second edition, revised and enlarged. 372 pp. Cl., $1.50 (7s. 6d.). 
HOMILIES OF SCIENCE. 
317 pages. Cloth, Gilt Top, $1.50 (7s. 6d.). 
THE IDEA OF GOD. 
Fourth edition. 32 pages. Paper, 15c¢ (9d.). 
THE SOUL OF MAN. 
anded. 182cuts. 482 pages. Cloth, $1.50 (6s. net). 
THE CHIEF’S DAUGHTER. 
A Legend of Niagara. Illustrated. Pp. 54. Cloth, $1.00. 
TRUTH IN FICTION. Twetve Taves witH A MorAL. 
White and gold binding, giltedges. Pp. 111. $1.00 (5s.). 
THE RELIGION OF SCIENCE. 
Second, extra edition. Pp.103. Cloth, 50c (2s. 6d.). 
PRIMER OF PHILOSOPHY 
240 pages. Third Edition. Cloth, $1.00 (5s.). 
THE GOSPEL OF BUDDHA. According to Old Records. 
Sixth Edition. Pp. 275. Cloth, $1.00 (5s.). In German, $1.25 (6s. 6d.). 
BUDDHISM AND ITS CHRISTIAN CRITICS. 
Pages, 311. Cloth, $1.25 (6s. 6d.). 
KARMA, A Story oF EarLty BuDDHISM. 
Illustrated by Japanese artists. Crépe paper, 75¢ (3s. 6d.). 
NIRVANA: A STory oF BuDDHIST PsyCHOLoGy. 
Japanese edition, like Karma, $1.00 (4s. 6d.). 
LAO-TZE’S TAO TEH KING. 
Chinese-English. Pp. 360. Cloth, $3.00 (15s.). 


CORNIEE CARL PE AINERTCE. 
THE PROPHETS OF ISRAEL. 
Pp., 200, Cloth, $1.00 (5s.). 
HISTORY OF THE PEOPLE OF ISRAEL. 
Pp. vi+ 325. Cloth, $1.50 (7s. 6d.). 


POWELE, We W. 
TRUTH AND ERROR; or, the Science of Intellection, 
Pp. 423. Cloth, $1.75 (7s. 6d.), 


RIBOR eH 
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF ATTENTION. 
THE DISEASES OF PERSONALITY. 
THE DISEASES OF THE WILL. 
Cloth, 75 cents each (38. 6d.). dl set, cloth, $1.75 (9s.). 
EVOLUTION OF GENERAL IDEAS. 
Pp. 231. Cloth, $1.25 (5s.). 


BUDGE, DR. E. A.- WALLIS. 
THE BOOK OF THE DEAD. 
3 vols. 420new vignettes. Crown 8vo. Cloth, $3.75 net. 


HUTCHINSON, WOODS. 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO DARWIN. 
Pp. xii+241. Price, $1.50 (6s.). 
FREYTAG, GUSTAV. 
THE LOST MANUSCRIPT, A Novel. 
2vols. 953 pages. Extra cloth, $4.00 (21s). One vol., cl., $1.00 (5s.). 


MARTIN LUTHER. 
Illustrated. Pp. 130. Cloth, $1.00 (5s.). 


ACVAGHOSBA. 
DISCOURSE ON THE AWAKENING OF FAITH in the Mahayana. 
From the Chinese by T. Suzuki. Pp., 176. Cl., $1.25 (5s. 6d.). 


TRUMBULL, M. M. 
THE FREE TRADE STRUGGLE IN ENGLAND. 
Second Edition, 296 pages. Cloth, 75c (3s. 6d.). 


WHEELBARROW: ARTICLES AND DISCUSSIONS ON THE LABOR QUESTION, 
With portrait of the author, 303 pages. Cloth, $1.00 (5s.). 


GOETHE AND SCHILLER’S XENIONS. 
Translated by Paul Carus. Album form. Pp. 162. Cl., $1.00 (5s.). 


-OLDENBERG, H. 
ANCIENT INDIA: ITS LANGUAGE AND RELIGIONS. 
Pp. 110. Cloth, 50c (as. 6d.). 


CONWAY, MONCURE D. 
SOLOMON, AND SOLOMONIC LITERATURE, 
Pp. 243. Cloth, $1.50 (6s.). 
DEDEKIND, R. 


ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF NUMBER. 
Trans. by W. W. Beman. Pp.115. Cl., 75 cents (3s. 6d.). 


GARBE, RICHARD. 
THE REDEMPTION OF THE BRAHMAN, A Tate oF Hinpu LIFE, 
Laid paper. Gilttop. 96 pages. Price, 75c (3s. 6d.). 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF ANCIENT INDIA. 
Pp. 89. Cloth, 5oc (as. 6d.). 


HUEPPE, FERDINAND. 
THE PRINCIPLES OF BACTERIOLOGY. 
28 Woodcuts. Pp. x +467. Price, $1.75 (9s.). 


LEVY-BRUHL, PROF. L. 
HISTORY OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY IN FRANCE. 
23 Portraits. Handsomely bound. Pp. 500. Price, $3.00 (r12s.), 


TOPINARD, DR. PAUL. 
SCIENCE AND FAITH. 
Pp. 374. Cloth, $1.50 (6s. 6d.). 


BINET, ALFRED. 
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF REASONING. 
Pp. 193. Cloth, 75c (3s. 6d.). 
THE PSYCHIC LIFE OF MICRO-ORGANISMS. 
Pp. 135. Cloth, 75c (3s. 6d.). 


N. B. Send for our large ILLUSTRATED CATALOGUE, contain- 
ing full details of our publications and of our two magazines, /he 
Open Court and The Montist. 


The Rulbeien of Scrence Library. 


Bi-monthly reprints of standard works, philosophical classics, etc. Yearly, 


$1.50. 


Separate copies according to prices quoted. 


. The Religion of Science. By Paut Carus. 25¢ (1S. 6d.). 


Three Introductory Lectures on the Science of Thought. By F. Max 
MULLER. 25¢ (1s. 6d.). 

Three Lectures on the Science of Language, F. MAx MiLuEr, 25¢ (1s.6d.). 

The Diseases of Personality, By Tu. Ripot. 25¢ (1s. 6d.). 

The Psychology of Attention. By Tu. Risot. 25¢ (1s. 6d.). 

The Psychic Life of Micro-Organisms. By ALFRED BINET. 25¢ (1s. 6d.). 

The Nature of the State. By PAut Carus.. 15c (gd.). 


. On Double Consciousness, By ALFRED BINET. 15C¢ (gd.). 

. Fundamental Problems. By PauL Carus, 50C (2s. 6d.). 

. The Diseases of the Will, By TH. Riot. 25¢ (1s. 6d.). 

. The Origin of Language. By Lupwic Notre. 15c¢ (9d.). 

. The Free Trade Struggle in England. M.™M.TRuMBULL. 25¢ (Is. 6d.). 
. Wheelbarrow on the Labor Question. By M. M. TRUMBULL. 35C (2s.). 

. The Gospel of Buddha. By Paut Carus. 35€ (2S.). 

. The Primer of Philosophy, By Pau CARUS. 25¢ (1S. 6d.). 

. On Memory, and The Specific Energies of the Nervous System, By PROF. 


EWALD HeErInG. 15¢ (gd.). 


. The Redemption of the Brahman, Tale of Hindu Life. By RicHarD 


GARBE, 25¢ (1S. 6d.). 


. An Examination of Weismannism, By G. J. ROMANES. 35€ (2S.). 

. On Germinal Selection. By AUGUST WEISMANN. 25C (Is. 6d.). 

. Lovers Three Thousand Years Ago. By T. A. Goopwin. (Out of print.) 
. Popular Scientific Lectures. By Ernst Macu. 500 (2s. 6d.). 

. Ancient India: Its Language and Religions, By H. OLDENBERG. 25C¢ 


(1s. 6d.). 


. The Prophets of Israel. By Pror. C. H. CorniLy, 25¢ (1. 6d.). 

. Homilies of Science. By PAUL CARUS, 35€ (2S.). 

. Thoughts on Religion, By G.J. RoMANES. 50Cc (2s. 6d.), 

. The Philosophy of Ancient India, By PRo¥F. RICHARD GARBE, 25C (IS. 6d.). 
. Martin Luther, By Gustav FREyTAG. 25¢ (1S. 6d.). 

. English Secularism, By GEORGE JACOB HOLYOAKE. 25¢C (Is. 6d.), 

. On Orthogenests. By TH. EIMER. 25¢ (1s. 6d.). 

. Chinese Philosophy. By Paut Carus. 25¢ (1s. 6d.). 

. The Lost Manuscrift, By Gustav FREYTAG. 60c (3s.), 

. A Mechanico-Phystological Theory of Organic Evolution, By CARL Von 


NAEGELI, : 15c (9d.). 


. Chinese Fiction, By Dr. GEorRGE T, CANDLIN. 15¢ (9d.). 

. Mathematical Essays and Recreations, By H. SCHUBERT, 25¢ (1s. 6d.). 
. The Ethical Froblem. By Paut Carus. 50¢ (2s. 6d.). 

. Buddhism and Its Christian Critics. By PAUL CaRuUS. 50¢ (2s. 6d.). 

. Psychology for Beginners. By Hiram M. STANLEY. 20€ (IS.). 

. Discourse on Method. By DESCARTES. 25¢ (1S. 6d.). 

. The Dawn of a New Era, By Paut Carus. 15¢ (gd.). 

. Kant and Spencer, By Paut CARuS, 200 (Is.). 

. The Soul of Man, By Paut Carus. 75¢ (3s. 6d.). 

. World's Congress Addresses, By C. C. BONNEY. 15¢ (gd.), 

. The Gospel According to Darwin. By Woops HUTCHINSON. 50C (2s. 6d.). 
. Whence and Whither, By Faut Carus. 25¢ (18S. 6d.). 

. Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding. By Davip HuME. 25c 


(1s. 6d.). 


. Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals. By Davip Hume, 25¢ 


(1s. 6d.). 


. The Psychology of Reasoning, By ALFRED BINET, 25C (1s. 6d.). 
. The Principles of Human Knowledge. By GEORGE BERKELEY, 25¢ (18.6d.). 
. Three Dialogues Between Hylas and Philonous, By GEORGE BERKELEY. 


25c (1s. 6d). 


. Public Worship: A Study in the Psychology of Religion. By Joun P. 


Hytan. 25c (1s. 6d.). 


. Descartes’ Meditations, with Selections from the Principles, 35c (2s.). 
. Kant’s Prolegomena, 50c (2s. 6d.). (In preparation.) 


The Open Court Publishing Company 


Date Due 


Library Bureau Cat. no. 1137 


: (Ej 9 age fines ey | 
is LOW 


i , : : : 
Tg ee ea a ae ae ee aaa “e 


PEYTUPTELIATICOT 


PREREL LR ESE 


